- [[A Text Renaissance]]
    https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2020/02/24/a-text-renaissance/
        - "There is a renaissance underway in online text as a medium. The Four Horsemen of this emerging Textopia are:"
            - "[Roam](https://roamresearch.com/), a hypertext publishing platform best understood as a medium for composing conspiracy theories and extended universes."
            - "[Substack](https://substack.com/), a careful and thorough ground-up neoclassical reconstruction of the age-old email newsletter."
            - "Static websites, built out of frameworks like [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) or [Gatsby](http://gatsbyjs.org/) (full disclosure: a consulting client)."
            - "And finally, [Threaded Twitter](https://twitter.com/vgr/status/1205983999274840064), a user-pioneered hack-turned-supported feature that has wonderfully revitalized the platform."
        - ........
        - "The text renaissance is an actual __renaissance. __It’s a story of history-inspired renewal in a very fundamental way: exciting recent developments are due in part to a new generation of young product visionaries circling back to the early history of digital text, rediscovering old, abandoned ideas, and reimagining the bleeding edge in terms of the unexplored adjacent possible of the 80s and 90s."
        - .......
        - "Roam attempts to implement a near-full conception of hypertext as originally conceived by visionaries like Vannevar Bush and Ted Nelson. I’ve been using it for a couple of months now. It’s a revelation what a thoughtfully implemented version of a powerful vision can do to unexpectedly transform something you think you understand deeply at a [Fingerspitzengefühl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fingerspitzengef%C3%BChl) (finger-tips feeling) level, like I think I do writing."
        - "On the surface, Roam looks like a cross between a slightly weird wiki and a note-taking tool like Evernote. It’s not. It implements a few key features of 1980s vintage hypertext visions — block-level addressability, transclusion (changes in referenced blocks being “transfer-included” wherever they are cited), and bidirectional linking — that utterly transform the writing experience at the finger-tips level. You end up organizing high-level structure as you work at fleshing out low-level chunks of information, because the UX collapses high and low-level thinking into a single behavior."
        - "So you can write, structure, organize, refactor, bundle/unbundle, all in a single subconsciously learnable flow. You don’t have to think consciously about this: it gets compiled down to finger-tip skill as you use it. This is the sort of product I was dimly groping around for, and trying to build at Xerox 10 years ago. I wasn’t smart enough to pull it off, and back then, the technology wasn’t there either anyway. Now the tech is there, and there’s someone on the scene smart enough to pull it off."
        - "I met up with Roam founder [[Conor White-Sullivan]] last week in San Francisco and had a nice long walk-and-talk chat around the Mission with him. People who pull off impressive feats of visionary product engineering often don’t quite recognize what they’ve done, but that’s not the case with with Conor. He knows what he’s doing, he knows the history (aka [idea maze](https://cdixon.org/2013/08/04/the-idea-maze)) of the product he’s built, and he’s got the opinionated approach I look for when adopting a commercial product. He’s also nailed the essential message-of-the-medium use case of Roam: conspiracy theories. Or alternately, extended-universe building. We’re in a fake-news world and we might as well get good at it. __Good__ in both senses of the term."
        - "It can also do note-taking, workflows (like kinda-sorta competitor Notion), and wiki-like knowledge management, but those use cases are not as interesting to me. Conspiracy theories and extended universes, in the best senses of those terms — escaped reality construction might be the general category — is what Roam __wants __to be about."
        - "The name, incidentally, is a play-on-words joke apparently. As in Rome wasn’t built in a day."
- 
