- The Take Smart Notes principle works. Many successful writers, artists and academics use some form of a slip-box. This book is also written with the help of the slip-box. It was, for example, a note on “technology, acceptance problems” that pointed out to me that an answer to the question why some people struggle to implement the slip-box could be found in a book on the history of the shipping container. I certainly would not have looked for that intentionally–doing research for a book on effective writing! This is just one of many ideas and connections the slip-box pointed out to me. That it is not just a tool to write more efficiently, but also a training device for serious long-term learning, should have been obvious to me, but wasn’t. Only when I was taking smart notes on more recent learning experiments did it dawn on me that I am in the middle of putting exactly into practice what is proven to work best. I want to point out, though, that I sometimes have ideas all by myself.
- The particular technique presented in this book enabled Niklas Luhmann to become one of the most productive and innovative social theorists of the last century. There are increasing numbers of academics and nonfiction writers taking notice.[ 44] But it is still not an easy sell for the majority of students and writers. There are different reasons for this. First of all, the long-term, cross-topic organization of notes, which is guided only by one’s own understanding and interest, is very much at odds with the modular, compartmentalised and top-down approach in which the curricula of universities and colleges are organised. Teaching is still set up for review, and students are not really encouraged to independently build a network of connections between heterogeneous information–despite the radical change in our understanding on how our memory and learning works. There is a lot of talk about innovative approaches. But without changing the actual workflow, this talk is idle. Some seemingly innovative ideas, like the “learner-centred” approach, often do more harm than good, as they still neglect the need for an external scaffolding to think in. It is not the learner who should be the focus of attention.
- The slip-box does not put the learner in the centre. Quite the contrary: It allows the learner to let his or her own thinking become decentralised within a network of other ideas. Learning, thinking and writing should not be about accumulating knowledge, but about becoming a different person with a different way of thinking. This is done by questioning one’s own thinking routines in the light of new experiences and facts.
- The prevalence of linear and learner-centred approaches also lead to the common misunderstanding about the use of the slip-box as a tool that can be used without changing the work routines around it. It is then often used simply as an archive where you just take out what you put in earlier. This, of course, will lead to disappointment. If we are just storing information, there would be no need to use a slip-box. To reap its benefits, we need to change our working routines. And the basis for that is a deep understanding on how and why it works and how the different steps and tasks of writing fit together. This is why a book, not just a manual, is needed to explain the principle and ideas behind it.
- Another reason why this technique is still a hard sell is that most students only realise the need for a good system when they already struggling with their writing, typically towards the end of the university program, when a bachelor’s, master’s or doctoral thesis needs to be written. It certainly still helps, but it would have helped much more if one started earlier–very much like saving for retirement. It is also difficult to change behaviour in times of stress. The more pressure we feel, the more we tend to stick to our old routines–even when these routines caused the problems and the stress in the first place. This is known as the tunnel effect (Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). But Mullainathan and Shafir, who examined this phenomenon thoroughly, also found a way out of it: Change is possible when the solution appears to be simple.
- And that is the very good news at the end. The slip-box is as simple as it gets. Read with a pen in your hand, take smart notes and make connections between them. Ideas will come by themselves and your writing will develop from there. There is no need to start from scratch. Keep doing what you would do anyway: Read, think, write. Just take smart notes along the way.
