- **Your name:** Alexandra Westhoff
- **Website:** Alexandra-westhoff-czt.de
- **Profession:** Teacher Ort a German Realschule (Textile Arts, Arts, History, Music, and Computer Science)
- **Twitter:** @alwesthoff
- **Book Club 1 member? (y/n):** n
- **Location:** Germany
- **Fleeting notes:**
    - Chapter 1
        - "There is another reason that note-taking flies mostly under the radar: We don’t experience any immediate negative feedback if we do it badly. But without an immediate experience of failure, there is also not much demand for help. And the publishing market working how it works, there is not much help in supply for this lack of demand either. It is the panic in front of the blank screen that brings students and academic writers to turn to the bookshelves full of self-help books on writing, a market publishers meet in droves by focusing on how to deal with this horse-has-already-left-the-barn situation. If we take notes unsystematically, inefficiently or simply wrong, we might not even realise it until we are in the midst of a deadline panic and wonder why there always seem to be a few who get a lot of good writing done and still have time for a coffee every time we ask them. And even then, it is more likely that some form of rationalization will cloud the view of the actual reason, which is most likely the difference between good and bad note-taking. “Some people are just like that,” “writing has to be difficult,” “the struggle is part of the deal” are just a few of the mantras that keep too many from inquiring what exactly distinguishes successful writing strategies from less successful ones. "
            - Students at school (grades 5-10) don't learn how to take notes. Most of the classes are structured on other ways. When these students leave for grades 11-13 to reach A-Levels, most of school STILL isn't structured in this way. And at uni, the style of studying is lethally different. #[[German school system]] #Realschule #Abitur #A-Levels #University
            - In German Realschule there is no learning from books. It's only learning from what the teacher summarized on the blackboard. #Realschule #[[German school system]]
            - Students don't see the necessity to learn how to read with looking for information in mind. Most of them see the text, recognize it and fall into the fallacy that they do know it. #[[text recognition fallacy]] #[[reading ability]] #Textverständnis
        - "The right question is: What can we do differently in the weeks, months or even years before we face the blank page that will get us into the best possible position to write a great paper easily? Very few people struggle with their papers because they don’t know how to cite correctly or because they suffer from a psychological issue that keeps them from writing. Few struggle to text their friends or write emails. The rules of citation can be looked up and there is no way that there are as many mental issues as papers postponed. Most people struggle for much more mundane reasons, and one is the myth of the blank page itself. They struggle because they believe, as they are made to believe, that writing starts with a blank page. If you believe that you have indeed nothing at hand to fill it, you have a very good reason to panic. Just having it all in your head is not enough, as getting it down on paper is the hard bit. That is why good, productive writing is based on good note-taking. Getting something that is already written into another written piece is incomparably easier than assembling everything in your mind and then trying to retrieve it from there."
            - Germany need more creative writing class at school. The US is much much further into that than us Germans are. #[[creative writing]]. 
            - The only place German students have to write is in exams at school. Writing something out of their own mind, something that was born inside their own self is only encountered by the German student outside of school. #[[creative writing]] #[[writing as thinking]]
            - "With that in mind, it is not surprising that the single most important indicator of academic success is not to be found in people’s heads, but in the way they do their everyday work. In fact, there is no measurable correlation between a high IQ and academic success–at least not north of 120. Yes, a certain intellectual capacity helps to get into academia, and if you struggle severely with an IQ test, it is likely that you will struggle to solve academic problems, too. But once you are in, a superior IQ will neither help you to distinguish yourself nor protect you from failure. What does make a significant difference along the whole intelligence spectrum is something else: how much self-discipline or self-control one uses to approach the tasks at hand (Duckworth and Seligman, 2005; Tangney, Baumeister, and Boone, 2004)."
                - This is equally only taught on the sidelines in the German school system as I experience it. #productivity #time-management #[[Goals for Book Club]] #planning #studying
        - "As students, researchers and nonfiction writers, we have so much more freedom than others to choose what we want to spend our time on. Still, we often struggle the most with procrastination and motivation. It is certainly not the lack of interesting topics, but rather the employment of problematic work routines that seems to take charge of us instead of allowing us to steer the process in the right direction. A good, structured workflow puts us back in charge and increases our freedom to do the right thing at the right time."
            - Again, when do German highschool students get the chance to do this? When do they get this freedom? When do they get the chance to learn how to structure their [[workflow]] to get into the [[flow]]? Do high schoolers experience this? #[[German school system]] 
            - "Having a clear structure to work in is completely different from making plans about something. If you make a plan, you impose a structure on yourself; it makes you inflexible. To keep going according to plan, you have to push yourself and employ willpower. This is not only demotivating, but also unsuitable for an open-ended process like research, thinking or studying in general, where we have to adjust our next steps with every new insight, understanding or achievement–which we ideally have on a regular basis and not just as an exception. Even though planning is often at odds with the very idea of research and learning, it is the mantra of most study guides and self-help books on academic writing. How do you plan for insight, which, by definition, cannot be anticipated? It is a huge misunderstanding that the only alternative to planning is aimless messing around. The challenge is to structure one’s workflow in a way that insight and new ideas can become the driving forces that push us forward. We do not want to make ourselves dependent on a plan that is threatened by the unexpected, like a new idea, discovery–or insight."
                - What is the right mix of a self-imposed [[structure]] and [[goal-setting]]? Are there different phases where you do this? Freedom to explore at one point, but working with goals and [[to-dos]] and structure at another time?
                - Is this kind of learning what's missing in schools? Os this why students don't enjoy learning? How can we implement this with younger people who need more [[guidance]] in their learning?
                - Students have difficulty transferring knowledge from one school subject to another. This would surely help with that! #[[knowlege transfer]]
            - "Complexity is an issue, though. Even if you don’t aim to develop a grand theory and just want to keep track of what you read, organise your notes and develop your thoughts, you will have to deal with an increasingly complex body of content, especially because it is not just about collecting thoughts, but about making connections and sparking new ideas. Most people try to reduce complexity by separating what they have into smaller stacks, piles or separate folders. They sort their notes by topics and sub-topics, which makes it look less complex, but quickly becomes very complicated. Plus, it reduces the likelihood of building and finding surprising connections between the notes themselves, which means a trade-off between its usability and usefulness."
                - At what age are children able to tag notes? How can teachers get them to note down aha-moments and those fleeting ideas of, hey, that's reminding me of... how do we get a culture of knowledge-investigators? #[[brain development]]
        - "He soon developed new categories of these notes. He realised that one idea, one note was only as valuable as its context, which was not necessarily the context it was taken from. So he started to think about how one idea could relate and contribute to different contexts. Just amassing notes in one place would not lead to anything other than a mass of notes. But he collected his notes in his slip-box in such a way that the collection became much more than the sum of its parts. His slip-box became his dialogue partner, main idea generator and productivity engine. It helped him to structure and develop his thoughts. And it was fun to work with–because it worked."
            - So far, I use the method only to summarize book notes or whole articles and link them together with tags. Luhmann goes one step further and thanks about the contexts, other  than the obvious one the text is taken from. Is there a kind of mind-work-flow about how to do that? Like a series of questions to see links that aren't obvious? So far I had a sudden insight of "hey that reminds me of". but is there a way you can train yourself to do that? [[progressive summarization]] #connection
                - "Whenever he read something, he would write the bibliographic information on one side of a card and make brief notes about the content on the other side (Schmidt 2013, 170). These notes would end up in the bibliographic slip-box."
                    - Am I, so far, just writing [[bibliographical notes]], then? Am I missing the second step? 
                - "In a second step, shortly after, he would look at his brief notes and think about their relevance for his own thinking and writing. He then would turn to the main slip-box and write his ideas, comments and thoughts on new pieces of paper, using only one for each idea and restricting himself to one side of the paper, to make it easier to read them later without having to take them out of the box. He kept them usually brief enough to make one idea fit on a single sheet, but would sometimes add another note to extend a thought."
                    - What's the difference of this second step and [[Evergreen Notes]]? 
                        - [[Evergreen Notes]] are the quintessence of the article/book (?)
                        - Luhmann's second step are only his own [[cascade of insights]] on these evergreen notes (?)
                - "He usually wrote his notes with an eye towards already existing notes in the slip-box. And while the notes on the literature were brief, he wrote them with great care, not much different from his style in the final manuscript: in full sentences and with explicit references to the literature from which he drew his material. More often than not, a new note would directly follow up on another note and would become part of a longer chain of notes. He then would add references to notes somewhere else in the slip-box, some of them which were located nearby, others in completely different areas and contexts. Some were directly related and read more like comments, others contained not-so-obvious connections. Rarely would a note stay in isolation."
                    - references from which he drew his material: did he write where he got that idea from? Even if it was his own insights? #quote #reference
                    - When does a reference become your when thought?
                    - The [[reference]]s to other notes, where those like Roam's [[Tags]]? Or were they a string of thoughts kickstarted by one summary/note/reference he made? #[[cascade of insights]]
                - "He did not just copy ideas or quotes from the texts he read, but made a transition from one context to another. It was very much like a translation where you use different words that fit a different context, but strive to keep the original meaning as truthfully as possible. Writing that an author struggles in one chapter to justify his method can be a much more adequate description of this chapter’s content than any quote from the text itself (this would call for an explanation, of course)."
                    - this is translation into [[meta]] (?)
            - "Luhmann was able to focus on the important things right in front of him, pick up quickly where he left off and stay in control of the process because the structure of his work allowed him to do this. If we work in an environment that is flexible enough to accommodate our work rhythm, we don’t need to struggle with resistance. Studies on highly successful people have proven again and again that success is not the result of strong willpower and the ability to overcome resistance, but rather the result of smart working environments that avoid resistance in the first place (cf. Neal et al. 2012; Painter et al. 2002; Hearn et al. 1998). Instead of struggling with adverse dynamics, highly productive people deflect resistance, very much like judo champions. This is not just about having the right mindset, it is also about having the right workflow. It is the way Luhmann and his slip-box worked together that allowed him to move freely and flexibly between different tasks and levels of thinking. It is about having the right tools and knowing how to use them–and very few understand that you need both."
                - What is the right [[mindset]] to deflect [[resistance]]?
            - "The trick is that he did not organise his notes by topic, but in the rather abstract way of giving them fixed numbers. The numbers bore no meaning and were only there to identify each note permanently. If a new note was relevant or directly referred to an already existing note, such as a comment, correction or addition, he added it directly behind the previous note. If the existing note had the number 22, the new note would become note number 23. If 23 already existed, he named the new note 22a. By alternating numbers and letters, with some slashes and commas in between, he was able to branch out into as many strings of thought as he liked. For example, a note about causality and systems theory carried the number 21/ 3d7a7 following a note with the number 21/ 3d7a6."
                - How much is this different from [[nesting]] categories into categories, just with copies in all folders that though could fit into? (yes, I know that is not practical, it's the thought that I mean.) I guess I'm trying to see if [[Roam]] goes one step beyond what even Luhmann was doing here, with it's bi-directionality.
            - "Whenever he added a note, he checked his slip-box for other relevant notes to make possible connections between them. Adding a note directly behind another note is only one way of doing this. Another way is by adding a link on this and/ or the other note, which could be anywhere in the system. This very much resembles, of course, the way we use hyperlinks on the internet. But, as I will explain later, they are quite different and it would be rather misleading to think of his slip-box as a personal Wikipedia or a database on paper. The similarities are obviously there, but the subtle differences are what makes this system unique."
                - Again, was there some kind of method to his madness? How did he check 90000 notes? Especially if there was no categories or structure? Was there a big [[index]] of what number meant what? I know he had some structural notes, but did he work just on [[intuition]]? How do I make sure I don't miss a crucial connection to something I have forgotten about that I wrote it? Is there a way to maximize finding [[connectivity]]?
            - "The last element in his file system was an index, from which he would refer to one or two notes that would serve as a kind of entry point into a line of thought or topic. Notes with a sorted collection of links are, of course, good entry points."
                - Is this [[index]] like the All Pages tab in Roam? How does one care for such index pages in Roam? What If I don't check them over every time I add new things? Or is it a "hey, let's start a search on this" kind of thing? #[[connectivity workflow]]
            - 
    - Chapter 2
        - "Write exactly one note for each idea and write as if you were writing for someone else: Use full sentences, disclose your sources, make references and try to be as precise, clear and brief as possible. Throw away the fleeting notes from step one and put the literature notes from step two into your reference system. You can forget about them now. All that matters is going into the slip-box."
            - Why not keep the fleeting notes if the are questions to ask the author? If they're conversations with the book/author? If the literature notes are what's in the book, why not keep your insights as permanent notes? I mean, by making the fleeting note permanent, not by writing it as a new note? 
                - This is exactly what you do: by making your [[fleeting notes]] understandable to your future self, apart from the original backbone of the source, they become the [[permanent notes]]. 
        - "5. Develop your topics, questions and research projects bottom up from within the system. See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. Even if you don’t have anything in your slip-box yet, you never start from scratch–you already have ideas on your mind to be tested, opinions to be challenged and questions to be answered. Do not brainstorm for a topic. Look into the slip-box instead to see where chains of notes have developed and ideas have been built up to clusters. Don’t cling to an idea if another, more promising one gains momentum. The more you become interested in something, the more you will read and think about it, the more notes you will collect and the more likely it is that you will generate questions from it. It might be exactly what you were interested in from the beginning, but it is more likely that your interests will have changed–that is what insight does."
            - This feels like getting lost in the [[internet]].
        - "6. After a while, you will have developed ideas far enough to decide on a topic to write about. Your topic is now based on what you have, not based on an unfounded idea about what the literature you are about to read might provide. Look through the connections and collect all the relevant notes on this topic (most of the relevant notes will already be in partial order), copy them onto your “desktop”[ 6] and bring them in order. Look for what is missing and what is redundant. Don’t wait until you have everything together. Rather, try ideas out and give yourself enough time to go back to reading and note-taking to improve your ideas, arguments and their structure. "
            - Is there a way to import that draft into a [[corkboard]] app like Scrivener?
        - "A typical work day will contain many, if not all, of these steps: You read and take notes. You build connections within the slip-box, which in itself will spark new ideas. You write them down and add them to the discussion. You write on your paper, notice a hole in the argument and have another look in the file system for the missing link. You follow up on a footnote, go back to research and might add a fitting quote to one of your papers in the making."
            - How do you work with [[footnotes]] in Roam?
    - Chapter 3
        - "We need four tools: · Something to write with and something to write on (pen and paper will do) · A reference management system (the best programs are free) · The slip-box (the best program is free) · An editor (whatever works best for you: very good ones are free) More is unnecessary, less is impossible."
            - What other (kinds of) [[reference management system]]s are there?
    - Chapter 4
    - Chapter 5
        - "This book is based on another assumption: Studying does not prepare students for independent research. It is independent research. Nobody starts from scratch and everybody is already able to think for themselves. Studying, done properly, is research, because it is about gaining insight that cannot be anticipated and will be shared within the scientific community under public scrutiny. There is no such thing as private knowledge in academia. An idea kept private is as good as one you never had. And a fact no one can reproduce is no fact at all. Making something public always means to write it down so it can be read. There is no such thing as a history of unwritten ideas."
            - Students need to learn how to learn and research BEFORE they leave [[school]], not after. Even if they don't go to uni, they might encounter having to learn something without outside guidance in whatever other job they work. #[[German school system]]
            - It's not important if you have to write a paper about your research, you can also use this to get a foot in the door at a new job or while changing fields in your old one. #[[Personal Growth]]
        - "School is different. Pupils are usually not encouraged to follow their own learning paths, question and discuss everything the teacher is teaching and move on to another topic if something does not promise to generate interesting insight. The teacher is there for the pupils to learn. But, as Wilhelm von Humboldt, founder of the Humboldt University of Berlin and brother to the great explorer Alexander von Humboldt, put it, the professor is not there for the student and the student not for the professor. Both are only there for the truth. And truth is always a public matter. Everything within the university aims at some kind of publication. A written piece does not necessarily need to be accepted in an international journal to become public. In fact, the vast majority of what is written and discussed is not published in this narrow sense. The review process itself is a form of presenting an idea publicly to the peers and so is everything a student hands over to a professor or lecturer. Even the handout for a presentation discussed with fellow students is a written piece made public. It is public because in the discussion, it does not matter anymore what the author meant, only what is there in writing. The moment the author can be removed from the scene, the written piece is a public claim on truth. The criteria for a convincing argument are always the same, regardless of who the author is or the status of the publisher: They have to be coherent and based on facts. Truth does not belong to anyone; it is the outcome of the scientific exchange of written ideas. This is why the presentation and the production of knowledge cannot be separated, but are rather two sides of the same coin (Peters and Schäfer 2006, 9). "
            - Yes, school is different. But most students never learn that there other [[ways of learning]] but those.
            - I don't really agree with that research and writing being connected like that. But why else research? Why else read books? For your own entertainment, for your own way forward in life. #[[Personal Growth]]
        - "Focusing on writing as if nothing else counts does not necessarily mean you should do everything else less well, but it certainly makes you do everything else differently. Having a clear, tangible purpose when you attend a lecture, discussion or seminar will make you more engaged and sharpen your focus. You will not waste your time with the attempt to figure out what you “should” learn. Rather, you will try to learn as efficiently as possible so you can quickly get to the point where actual open questions arise, as these are the only questions worth writing about. You quickly learn to distinguish good-sounding arguments from actual good ones, as you will have to think them through whenever you try to write them down and connect them with your previous knowledge. It will change the way you read as well: You will become more focused on the most relevant aspects, knowing that you cannot write down everything. You will read in a more engaged way, because you cannot rephrase anything in your own words if you don’t understand what it is about. By doing this, you will elaborate on the meaning, which will make it much more likely that you will remember it. You also have to think beyond the things you read, because you need to turn it into something new. And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. Deliberate practice is the only serious way of becoming better at what we are doing (cf. Anders Ericsson, 2008). If you change your mind about the importance of writing, you will also change your mind about everything else. Even if you decide never to write a single line of a manuscript, you will improve your reading, thinking and other intellectual skills just by doing everything as if nothing counts other than writing."
            - Find out what you want to learn before you tackle it, rather than listening to a lecture without having an idea what it's going to be about. #[[Knowledge Management]]
                - Focus on your open [[questions]], rather that having to keep up with what is being said to wade through the chaos of your notes later.
                - Having a [[goal]] enables you to check it, after that open question, that problem of understanding has been solved.
                - Reading with a question in mind enables you to get into a [[conversation with the author]]. 
                - Reading with a question in mind enables you to judge if a book is well written (does the author answer the [[questions]] he raises?) 
    - Chapter 6
        - "Many students and academic writers think like the early ship owners when it comes to note-taking. They handle their ideas and findings in the way it makes immediate sense: If they read an interesting sentence, they underline it. If they have a comment to make, they write it into the margins. If they have an idea, they write it into their notebook, and if an article seems important enough, they make the effort and write an excerpt. Working like this will leave you with a lot of different notes in many different places. Writing, then, means to rely heavily on your brain to remember where and when these notes were written down. A text must then be conceptualised independently from these notes, which explains why so many resort to brainstorming to arrange the resources afterwards according to this preconceived idea. In this textual infrastructure, this so-often-taught workflow, it indeed does not make much sense to rewrite these notes and put them into a box, only to take them out again later when a certain quote or reference is needed during writing and thinking."
            - Change the way you record your knowledge to work in every context you can meet it. Notes stuck in the books they were made in (or in folders about them) will not get them connected. #connections
            - Find a place for all your knowledge and connect it (like the Zettelkasten or Roam), for your brain does not have the capacity to remember not only the knowledge itself but the palace where you got it from. That's what [[second brain]]s are for. #[[limitations of our brains]]
        - "To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes:"
            - "1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two."
            - "2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box."
            - "3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished."
                -  Fleeting notes can become Permanent notes (own thoughts) and, as [[communication with the author]], even become Evergreen notes or roots for more research.
                - The only works if even fleeting notes are written with the [[future self]] in mind.
                - What are [[archived notes]]? Are they different from fleeting notes or Zettels?
        - "Only if the notes of these three categories are kept separated it will be possible to build a critical mass of ideas within the slip-box. One of the major reasons for not getting much writing or publishing done lies in the confusion of these categories."
            - And I'm still a bit confused. Fleeting notes are my own thoughts, Literature notes are the author's notes? Permanent Notes are a combination of the two, or an amalgamation, or a summarization? 
        - "[[Fleeting Notes]]"
            - "Danger of writing everything down that appears interesting and important and never sifting through to clear out and focus on what can be re-used"
                - So revisiting your fleeting notes and summarizing them, explaining them and linking them turn them into permanent notes. Same with literature notes, right?
                - Don't collect stuff in folders, but put it all into one Zettelkasten or Roamgraph.
                - [[note-taking]] is one thing, [[processing]] turns them into Zettels.
        - "It is important to reflect on the purpose of these different types of notes. Fleeting notes are there for capturing ideas quickly while you are busy doing something else. When you are in a conversation, listening to a lecture, hear something noteworthy or an idea pops into your mind while you are running errands, a quick note is the best you can do without interrupting what you are in the middle of doing. That might even apply to reading, if you want to focus on a text without interrupting your reading flow. Then you might want to just underline sentences or write short comments in the margins. It is important to understand, though, that underlining sentences or writing comments in the margins are also just fleeting notes and do nothing to elaborate on a text. They will very soon become completely useless–unless you do something with them. If you already know that you will not go back to them, don’t take these kind of notes in the first place. Take proper notes instead. Fleeting notes are only useful if you review them within a day or so and turn them into proper notes you can use later. Fleeting literature notes can make sense if you need an extra step to understand or grasp an idea, but they will not help you in the later stages of the writing process, as no underlined sentence will ever present itself when you need it in the development of an argument. These kinds of notes are just reminders of a thought, which you haven’t had the time to elaborate on yet. Permanent notes, on the other hand, are written in a way that can still be understood even when you have forgotten the context they are taken from."
            - Still not quite clear on what it is I'm doing here right now. If I'm conversing with the author like this, questioning my understanding of a text, am I writing fleeting notes? Or literature notes? I'm not making test or summarizing it, I'm writing my own questions. Literature notes are the thoughts of somebody else, fleeting notes are my own thoughts? #Differenciation
            - Fleeting notes are just reminders of a thought. Permanent notes are context-less and can be put to use in any project that links to them, not just the book they're taken from. So fleeting notes need the original sources' foundation to be understood, which makes sense when I'm conversing with the author, but if I make them understandable in any sort of context other than the original book, too, then they become permanent. #Workflow
            - And that's the difference between literature notes and permanent notes, too. Literature notes are other people's thoughts, and permanent notes are my own thoughts, both summarized in a way that works without the context of the original work. #insight
    - Chapter 7
        - "The process of writing is vastly misunderstood. If you grab off the shelf a random study guide or self-help book on writing and skim through the first pages, the chances are that you will encounter something like this: “To make your research more efficient, your first step should be to narrow the aspect you choose to focus on and also formulate an explicit question that your research and analysis will address.”[ 14] Almost always, the decision on the topic is presented as the necessary first step, after which follows everything else, like in this guide: “When you have chosen a topic that is right for you, having taken into consideration your personal interests and any necessary background knowledge that may be needed, assess the availability of sources.”[ 15] Thereafter, you will certainly find a multi-step plan you are supposed to follow: Be it twelve steps, according to the Academic Skills & Learning Centre of the Australian National University, or eight, if you go with the recommendations of the Writing Center of the University of Wisconsin, the rough order is always the same: Make a decision on what to write about, plan your research, do your research, write. Interestingly enough, these road maps usually come with the concession that this is only an idealised plan and that in reality, it rarely works like that. This is certainly true. Writing can’t be that linear. The obvious question is: If that is true, why not root the course of action in reality instead?"
            - Writing is not linear. It is circular.
        - "By focusing on what is interesting and keeping written track of your own intellectual development, topics, questions and arguments will emerge from the material without force. Not only does it mean that finding a topic or a research question will become easier, as we don’t have to squeeze it out of the few ideas that are on top of our head anymore, every question that emerges out of our slip-box will naturally and handily come with material to work with. If we look into our slip-box to see where clusters have built up, we not only see possible topics, but topics we have already worked on–even if we were not able to see it up front. The idea that nobody ever starts from scratch suddenly becomes very concrete. If we take it seriously and work accordingly, we literally never have to start from scratch again."
            - You need interest and a basic network of knowledge to find a question you want to write about. With a Zettelkasten, we have the groundwork and network already in place and can ask the question that interests us and then fill out the blanks in the Kasten with more research.
        - "After many years of working with students, I am convinced that the attempt of these study guides to squeeze a nonlinear process like writing into a linear order is the main reason for the very problems and frustrations they promise to solve. How can you not have trouble finding a topic if you believe you have to decide on one before you have done your research, have read and learned about something? How can you not feel threatened by an empty page if you have literally nothing at hand to fill it with? Who can blame you for procrastinating if you find yourself stuck with a topic you decided on blindly and now have to stick with it as the deadline is approaching? And how can anyone be surprised that students feel overwhelmed with writing assignments when they are not taught how to turn months and years of reading, discussing and research into material they can really use?"
            - If you don't know where to start, because the field of possible question is too vast, of course you procrastinate. the mountain is too high to climb.
        - "But those who have already developed their thinking through writing can keep the focus on what is interesting for them at the moment and accumulate substantial material just by doing what they most feel like doing. The material will cluster around the questions they returned to most often, so they don’t risk too far of a departure from their interest. If your first chosen topic turns out to be not as interesting, you will just move on and your notes will cluster around something else. Maybe you will even note down the reasons why the first question is not interesting and turn that into an insight valuable enough to make public. When it finally comes to the decision on what to write about, you will already have made the decision–because you made it on every single step along the way, again and again every day, improving it gradually. Instead of spending your time worrying about finding the right topic, you will spend your time actually working on your already existing interests and doing what is necessary to make informed decisions–reading, thinking and writing. By doing the work, you can trust that interesting questions will emerge. You might not know where you will end up (and you don’t need to), but you can’t force insight into a preconceived direction anyway. You minimise both the risk of losing interest in a topic you have once chosen ill-informed and the risk of having to start all over again."
            - Having a Zettelkasten with what interests you already at hand, you can delve into it and follow possible routes and find out rather quickly, if that rout leads to something new and interesting of into a dead end that's not worth finding something new about. and with every Zettel you link together to find your topic, you make a decision on what interest you so you will have a topic to write about that doesn't bore you out of your mind.
                - BTW: This is a Literature note, not a fleeing note. Right?
    - Chapter 8
        - "Feedback loops are not only crucial for the dynamics of motivation, but also the key element to any learning process. Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, or in the more general terms of psychologist Carol Dweck, to grow. Dweck shows convincingly that the most reliable predictor for long-term success is having a “growth mindset.” To actively seek and welcome feedback, be it positive or negative, is one of the most important factors for success (and happiness) in the long run. Conversely, nothing is a bigger hindrance to personal growth than having a “fixed mindset.” Those who fear and avoid feedback because it might damage their cherished positive self-image might feel better in the short term, but will quickly fall behind in actual performance (Dweck 2006; 2013). Ironically, it is therefore often the highly gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck. Having been praised for what they are (talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing themselves to new challenges and the possibility of learning from failure. Embracing a growth mindset means to get pleasure out of changing for the better (which is mostly inwardly rewarding) instead of getting pleasure in being praised (which is outwardly rewarding). The orientation towards the latter makes one stick to safe, proven areas. The orientation towards the first draws the attention to the areas most in need of improvement. To seek as many opportunities to learn as possible is the most reliable long-term growth strategy. And if growth and success are not reasons enough, then maybe the fact that the fear of failure has the ugliest name of all phobias: Kakorrhaphiophobia."
            - Writing and learning profit only if they become a positive feedback loop. If the  success of wiring or learning something becomes positive, you want to go on doing it. If you get stuck and if becomes a chore, you will stop doing it.
            - Positive feedback loops enhance a growth mindset of wanting the joy of getting better to continue. If you're stuck in a fixed mindset, all you do is make sure you don't fall behind, but you don't expect to get better and don't put any energy into that, because you're too scared to fail.
                - Growth mindset: you get praised for what you do
                - Fixed mindset: you get praised for what you are.
        - "The same goes for writing permanent notes, which have another feedback loop built-in: Expressing our own thoughts in writing makes us realise if we really thought them through. The moment we try to combine them with previously written notes, the system will unambiguously show us contradictions, inconsistencies and repetitions. While these built-in feedback loops do not make redundant the feedback from your peers or supervisor, they are the only ones that are always available and can help us to improve a little bit, multiple times every single day. And the best thing about this is that while we learn and become better, our slip-box becomes more knowledgeable too. It grows and improves. And the more it grows, the more useful it becomes and the easier it will be for us to make new connections."
            - Yeah, stop right there: Combining permanent notes with other permanent notes. Luhmann did that trough his system of numbers. Tagging in Roam is not quite the same. If you write fleeting notes on your own permanent notes, and tag those... would that be a way to link that permanent note to other ideas? Like taking notes on the tags? Kinda? 
    - Chapter 9
        - "9.1 Give Each Task Your Undivided Attention:"
            - Interruptions make us dumber 
            - TV shortens our attention span
        - "9.2 Multitasking is not a good idea:"
            - Multitasking makes us feel productive, but in reality it lessens both the quality and the  quantity of our accomplishments.
            - Multitasking makes us unlearn the ability to focus on one thing.
            - Actual multitasking is impossible. we just change our focus from one thing to the other more quickly. That change in focus drains us more quickly.
            - Familiarity with a skill isn't the same as actual skill
            - Different tasks require different kinds of attention (not only flow).
        - "9.3 Give Each Task the Right Kind of Attention:"
            - Proofreading needs another kind of attention as finding the right words. You need to write first, no matter what joneses it's going to be, then proofread. Don't do both at the same time. You'll never get anything done.
            - Writing and proofreading are different form outlining, which differs from combining and developing thoughts, which differs from reading and researching. 
            - Focus on one thing at a time to do it well and circle around the task. this also gives you small goals to reach and feed the feedback loop. 
            - If you plan to rigidly, you lose the mental flexibility that's necessary to change paths if you notice that something doesn't really fit in your outline, or if research sends you off on a tangent. 
        - "9.4 Become an Expert Instead of a Planner:"
            - Planning hinders learning. If you just follow a plan, you close your mind off to new thoughts and ideas. If you see even academic writing as a form of art, you keep your mind open to learn new things to change views to have new ideas.
            - Stop following the rules. you are an expert when you know when to break them to get a better outcome. Get flexible and watch the situation, not the rules. Knowing the rules and knowing what to do without strictly referring to them is what's called gut feeling or intuition.
        - "9.5 Get Closure:"
            - Information is not stored in our head like on a memory stick, it floats around and takes up mental capacity. If we link information to existing knowledge, we remember it. Once a thought is done or closed, we forget about it and open up memory capacity again. Taking a note of something closes the thought in our mind. If we have a reliable outside system of notes (like a bullet journal and a Zettelkasten), we free up capacity for thought.
            - The Zeigarnik Effect (forgetting closed thoughts) can be used for our advantage: not closing a question can lead to rumination and possible surprising ideas or insight.
        - "9.6 Reduce the Number of Decisions:"
            - Willpower is like a muscle and can thus be trained.
                - We can cheat on ourselves to do something we don't feel like doing by trying to find something that makes us feel like we want to do the thing.
                - If we reduce the amount of decisions we have to make (in anything (color of clothes, kind of notebook, ink color...)), we free energy for useful tasks.
                - Taking a break supports learning and thinking.
    - Chapter 10
        - "If you understand what you read and translate it into the different context of your own thinking, materialised in the slip-box, you cannot help but transform the findings and thoughts of others into something that is new and your own. It works both ways: The series of notes in the slip-box develops into arguments, which are shaped by the theories, ideas and mental models you have in your head. And the theories, ideas and mental models in your head are also shaped by the things you read. They are constantly changing and challenged by the surprising connections with which the slip-box confronts you. The richer the slip-box becomes, the richer your own thinking becomes. The slip-box is an idea generator that develops in lockstep with your own intellectual development. Together, you can turn previously separated or even isolated facts into a critical mass of interconnected ideas."
            - Read with the Zettelkasten in mind and you will read for understanding and teaching your future self. You will try to fit what you read into the models and systems on your head and remodel those systems according to the new knowledge and understanding you gather.
                - Meeeeta!!!! We read and do the Zettelkasten Method to model our mind to work with the Zettelkasten Method.
        - "When we extract ideas from the specific context of a text, we deal with ideas that serve a specific purpose in a particular context, support a specific argument, are part of a theory that isn’t ours or written in a language we wouldn’t use. This is why we have to translate them into our own language to prepare them to be embedded into new contexts of our own thinking, the different context( s) within the slip-box. Translating means to give the truest possible account of the original work, using different words–it does not mean the freedom to make something fit. As well, the mere copying of quotes almost always changes their meaning by stripping them out of context, even though the words aren’t changed. This is a common beginner mistake, which can only lead to a patchwork of ideas, but never a coherent thought."
            - Translating texts literally from one language to another: is it better or equal to summarizing things with our own words? I find translating easier than summarizing, because the author has chosen the best words to describe something and summarizing it into my won words might change the meaning a little. Translating does sometimes change the meaning as well, if there is no word with exactly that nuance of being in the other language.
        -  "How extensive the literature notes should be really depends on the text and what we need it for. It also depends on our ability to be concise, the complexity of the text and how difficult it is to understand. As literature notes are also a tool for understanding and grasping the text, more elaborate notes make sense in more challenging cases, while in easier cases it might be sufficient to just jot down some keywords. Luhmann, certainly being on the outer spectrum of expertise, contented himself with pretty short notes and was still able to turn them into valuable slip-box notes without distorting the meaning of the original texts.[ 27] It is mainly a matter of having an extensive latticework of mental models or theories in our heads that enable us to identify and describe the main ideas quickly (cf. Rickheit and Sichelschmidt, 1999). Whenever we explore a new, unfamiliar subject, our notes will tend to be more extensive, but we shouldn’t get nervous about it, as this is the deliberate practice of understanding we cannot skip. Sometimes it is necessary to slowly work our way through a difficult text and sometimes it is enough to reduce a whole book to a single sentence. The only thing that matters is that these notes provide the best possible support for the next step, the writing of the actual slip-box notes. And what is most helpful is to reflect on the frame, the theoretical background, methodological approach or perspective of the text we read. That often means to reflect as much on what is not mentioned as what is mentioned."
            - Where is the line between a Literature note, summarizing a whole book into one sentence, and a Permanent note, summarizing what you learned from that book and writing down the thoughts it brought up about it in your mind?
        - "While selectivity is the key to smart note-taking, it is equally important to be selective in a smart way. Unfortunately, our brains are not very smart in selecting information by default. While we should seek out dis-confirming arguments and facts that challenge our way of thinking, we are naturally drawn to everything that makes us feel good, which is everything that confirms what we already believe we know."
            - Be careful of confirmation bias: i.e. marking something that affirms what you already know. Be aware of it at all times. Force yourself to look for things that don't agree with you.
        - "The linear process promoted by most study guides, which insanely starts with the decision on the hypothesis or the topic to write about, is a sure-fire way to let confirmation bias run rampant. First, you basically fix your present understanding, as the outcome instead of using it as the starting point, priming yourself for one-sided perception. Then you artificially create a conflict of interest between getting things done (finding support for your preconceived argument) and generating insight, turning any departure from your preconceived plan into a mutiny against the success of your own project. This is a good rule of thumb: If insight becomes a threat to your academic or writing success, you are doing it wrong."
            - If you start writing from a fixed idea of a question or topic, you will only "find" stuff that promotes your ideas.
            - Use the criterion of if something adds to a discussion to put things into the Zettelkasten. Look for contradictions, differentiation. Look for open connections.
        - "The ability to distinguish relevant from less relevant information is another skill that can only be learned by doing. It is the practice of looking for the gist and distinguishing it from mere supporting details. As we are forced to make this distinction when we read with a pen in our hand and write permanent note after permanent note, it is more than mere practice: it is deliberate practice repeated multiple times a day. Extracting the gist of a text or an idea and giving an account in writing is for academics what daily practice on the piano is for pianists: The more often we do it and the more focused we are, the more virtuous we become."
            - Extracting the gist is something that need practice.
        - "Patterns that help us navigate texts and discourses are not only theories, concepts or the respective terminology, but also typical mistakes we automatically scan an argument for, general categories we apply, writing styles that indicate a certain school of thought or mental models we learn or develop from different insights and can collect like a great and ever-increasing set of thinking tools. Without these tools and reference points, no professional reading or understanding would be possible. We would read every text in the same way: like a novel. But with the learned ability of spotting patterns, we can enter the circle of virtuosity: Reading becomes easier, we grasp the gist quicker, can read more in less time, and can more easily spot patterns and improve our understanding of them. And along the way, we increase our set of thinking tools, which will not only help with academic work, but with thinking and understanding in general. That is why Berkshire Hathaway vice chairman Charlie Munger describes as worldly-wise someone who has a broad set of these tools and knows how to apply them."
            - Practice to spot patters, models and systems. it not only helps you to grasp the gist quicker, it saves on reading and improves understanding.
        - "But this dynamic can only start if we ourselves deliberately decide to take on the task of reading and being selective about it, relying on nothing other than our own judgement of what is important and what is not. Textbooks or secondary literature in general cannot take this off our hands, and students who solely rely on them have no chance of becoming “worldly wise.” This is not far off from what philosopher Immanuel Kant described in his famous text about the Enlightenment: “Nonage [immaturity] is the inability to use one’s own understanding without another’s guidance. This nonage is self-imposed if its cause lies not in lack of understanding but in indecision and lack of courage to use one’s own mind without another’s guidance. Dare to know! (Sapere aude.) ‘Have the courage to use your own understanding,’ is therefore the motto of the Enlightenment.” (Kant 1784)"
            - Rely on your own judgment of what is important and what is not. Have courage and trust in your own abilities.
        - "I suggest taking this literally. The ability to use one’s own understanding is a challenge, not a given. Luhmann stresses the importance of permanent notes in this regard: “The problem with reading academic texts seems to be that we need not the short-term memory, but the long-term memory to develop reference points for distinguishing the important things from the less important, the new information from the mere repeated. But it is of course impossible to remember everything. That would be rote learning. To put it differently: One has to read extremely selectively and extract widespread and connected references. One has to be able to follow recurrences. But how to learn it if guidance is impossible? […] Probably the best method is to take notes–not excerpts, but condensed reformulated accounts of a text. Rewriting what was already written almost automatically trains one to shift the attention towards frames, patterns and categories in the observations, or the conditions/ assumptions, which enable certain, but not other descriptions. It makes sense to always ask the question: What is not meant, what is excluded if a certain claim is made? If someone speaks of ‘human rights:’ What distinction is made? A distinction towards ‘non-human rights?’ ‘Human duties?’ Is it a cultural comparison or one with some historic people who didn’t have the concept of human rights, but lived okay together anyway? Often, the text does not give an answer or a clear answer to this question. But then one has to resort to one’s own imagination.” (Luhmann 2000, 154f)"
            - Rewriting trains to look for patterns. What is meant, what is missing? what is excluded? Is it literally figurative?
        - "“The principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool,” Feynman stressed in a speech to young scientists (Feynman 1985, 342). Reading, especially rereading, can easily fool us into believing we understand a text. Rereading is especially dangerous because of the mere-exposure effect: The moment we become familiar with something, we start believing we also understand it. On top of that, we also tend to like it more (Bornstein 1989)."
            - Re-reading a text and thinking you understood it is fooling yourself. Familiarity is dangerous.
        -  "While it is obvious that familiarity is not understanding, we have no chance of knowing whether we understand something or just believe we understand something until we test ourselves in some form. If we don’t try to verify our understanding during our studies, we will happily enjoy the feeling of getting smarter and more knowledgeable while in reality staying as dumb as we were. This warm feeling disappears quickly when we try to explain what we read in our own words in writing. Suddenly, we see the problem. The attempt to rephrase an argument in our own words confronts us without mercy with all the gaps in our understanding. It certainly feels less good, but this struggle is the only chance we have to improve our understanding, to learn and move forward (cf. below). This, again, is deliberate practice. Now we are faced with a clear choice: We have to choose between feeling smarter or becoming smarter. And while writing down an idea feels like a detour, extra time spent, not writing it down is the real waste of time, as it renders most of what we read as ineffectual."
            - Testing our understanding is best done by expelling things to somebody (even ourself). Not writing something down to see if we got it is a waste of our reading time.
        - "Learning requires effort, because we have to think to understand and we need to actively retrieve old knowledge to convince our brains to connect it with new ideas as cues. To understand how groundbreaking this idea is, it helps to remember how much effort teachers still put into the attempt to make learning easier for their students by prearranging information, sorting it into modules, categories and themes. By doing that, they achieve the opposite of what they intend to do. They make it harder for the student to learn because they set everything up for reviewing, taking away the opportunity to build meaningful connections and to make sense of something by translating it into one’s own language. It is like fast food: It is neither nutritious nor very enjoyable, it is just convenient."
            - Don't pre-arrange things for students. Make them do that themselves. Make them do the work. That's the only way for them to learn.
                - See: Small teaching!
        - "When we try to answer a question before we know how to, we will later remember the answer better, even if our attempt failed (Arnold and McDermott 2013). If we put effort into the attempt of retrieving information, we are much more likely to remember it in the long run, even if we fail to retrieve it without help in the end (Roediger and Karpicke 2006). Even without any feedback, we will be better off if we try to remember something ourselves (Jang et al. 2012). The empirical data is pretty unambiguous, but these learning strategies do not necessarily feel right. Intuitively, most students resort to cramming, which is just another term for reading something again and again in a failed attempt to learn it (Dunlosky et al. 2013). And as much as rereading doesn’t help with learning, it certainly doesn’t help with understanding. Admittedly, cramming does get information into your head for a short while–usually long enough to stay in there to pass a test. But cramming won’t help you learn. As Terry Doyle and Todd Zakrajsek put it: “If learning is your goal, cramming is an irrational act” (Doyle and Zakrajsek 2013).[ 29]"
            - Prediction (Small Teaching): Trying to predict the answer to a. question before learning what the real outcome will be makes us remember things better because there already is a network in place where to connect that new knowledge.
        - "Working with the slip-box, therefore, doesn’t mean storing information in there instead of in your head, i.e. not learning. On the contrary, it facilitates real, long-term learning. It just means not cramming isolated facts into your brain–something you probably wouldn’t want to do anyway. The objection that it takes too much time to take notes and sort them into the slip-box is therefore short-sighted. Writing, taking notes and thinking about how ideas connect is exactly the kind of elaboration that is needed to learn. Not learning from what we read because we don’t take the time to elaborate on it is the real waste of time."
            - Writing for Learning does not only store stuff in your second brain, but in your first one, too. Elaboration means to think about the meaning of what you read.
            - The slip box has the details and references, the brain has the network and understanding to become creative.
    - Chapter 11
        - "Experienced academic readers usually read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches, while inexperienced readers tend to adopt the question of a text and the frames of the argument and take it as a given. What good readers can do is spot the limitations of a particular approach and see what is not mentioned in the text."
            - Look for the missing stuff
        - "Even more problematic than staying within the given frame of a text or an argument is the inability to interpret particular information in the text within the bigger frame or argument of the text. Even doctoral students sometimes just collect de-contextualised quotes from a text–probably the worst possible approach to research imaginable. This makes it almost impossible to understand the actual meaning of information. Without understanding information within its context, it is also impossible to go beyond it, to reframe it and to think about what it could mean for another question."
            - I need an example of this. If I make a note and cut it from it's context, I need to have the original intended framework and meaning in mind before I can use it somewhere else? 
        - "Jerome Bruner, a psychologist Lonka refers to, goes a step further and says that scientific thinking is plainly impossible if we can’t manage to think beyond a given context and we only focus on the information as it is given to us (Bruner, 1973, quoted after ibid.) It is not surprising, therefore, that Lonka recommends what Luhmann recommends: Writing brief accounts on the main ideas of a text instead of collecting quotes. And she also stresses that it is no less important to do something with these ideas–to think hard about how they connect with other ideas from different contexts and could inform questions that are not already the questions of the author of the respective text."
            - So the meaning is more important than the quote. then how do I use the meaning in context in my own work? How do I quote (cite) a text without quoting? Where is the line between my own thoughts that I learned from reading and studying and citing (literal quote) or quoting(using different words), which I have to make footnotes for in my text? I'm long out of academia, so I don't write papers anymore. Maybe the difference would be clearer to me if I had to write papers still. 
        - "The technique of writing a certain amount every day was perfected by Anthony Trollope, one of the most popular and productive authors of the 19th century: He would start every morning at 5: 30 a.m. with a cup of coffee and a clock in front of him. Then he would write at least 250 words every 15 minutes. This, he writes in his autobiography: “allowed me to produce over ten pages of an ordinary novel volume a day, and if kept up through ten months, would have given as its results three novels of three volumes each in the year” (Trollope, 2008, 272). And that, mind you, was before breakfast."
            - NaNoWriMo. That does not count the editing and proofreading and research and stuff though!
                - Lol; read the next block. Duh.
            - Any thought of a certain complexity requires writing. #Freewriting
        - "As we write notes with an eye towards existing notes, we take more into account than the information that is already available in our internal memory. That is extremely important, because the internal memory retrieves information not in a rational or logical way, but according to psycho-logical rules. The brain also doesn’t store information neurally and objectively. We reinvent and rewrite our memory every time we try to retrieve information. The brain works with rules of thumb and makes things look as if they fit, even if they don’t. It remembers events that never happened, connects unrelated episodes to convincing narratives and completes incomplete images. It cannot help but see patterns and meaning everywhere, even in the most random things (cf. Byrne, 2008). The brain, as Kahneman writes, is “a machine for jumping to conclusions” (Kahneman, 2013, 79). And a machine that is designed for jumping to conclusions is not the kind of machine you want to rely on when it comes to facts and rationality–at least, you would want to counterbalance it. Luhmann states as clearly as possible: it is not possible to think systematically without writing (Luhmann 1992, 53). Most people still think about thinking as a purely internal process, and believe that the only function of the pen is to put finished thoughts on paper. Richard Feynman once had a visitor in his office, a historian who wanted to interview him. When he spotted Feynman’s notebooks, he said how delighted he was to see such “wonderful records of Feynman’s thinking.”"
            - Don't trust your brain. It likes you too much to show you where you went wrong.
        - "But the first question I asked myself when it came to writing the first permanent note for the slip-box was: What does this all mean for my own research and the questions I think about in my slip-box? This is just another way of asking: Why did the aspects I wrote down catch my interest?"
            - Why did this catch my interest ist a very heavy question that I find quite hard to answer. I jump between interests, accumulate books that I don't have time to read and when I have the time, I have lost interest because I moved on to another topic. Writing down why something interests me might help me to come back to it later.
        - "While I am writing these notes, it becomes obvious that the answer to the question “why” has already triggered more follow-up questions, like: Isn’t this already discussed in theories of social inequality? If yes: Who discussed it? If not: Why not? And where do I turn to, to find answers to these questions? Correct: The first choice for further inquiry is the slip-box. Maybe there is already something on social inequality that helps me to answer these questions, or at least an indication of where to look."
            - Ask Why? for more questions. Ask Who? and check the Zettelkasten.
        - "By skimming through the slip-box, I might discover that these ideas could also be helpful for another topic I haven’t thought about. One example is the question of personal responsibility, which is discussed on the example of obesity and the influence of hormones as a sub-topic to a philosophical discussion on free will. None of it needs to be discussed right away, especially as most of these ideas would require more research and reading. But there is also no reason not to write down these possible connections and come back to them later, if my research points me back to them. The more notes the slip-box contains, the more interesting and prolific this step will become and the more research questions will be triggered."
            - Note ideas that tangent what you are actually looking for. Like falling into the wikipedia-hole, just note down the idea of where to look for something that caught your eye for later.
        - "It is difficult, if not impossible, to verify this claim, but it does make sense to shift the attention from storage strength to retrieval strength. Learning would be not so much about saving information, like on a hard disk, but about building connections and bridges between pieces of information to circumvent the inhibition mechanism in the right moment. It is about making sure that the right “cues” trigger the right memory, about how we can think strategically to remember the most useful information when we need it."
            - Learning is triggering the right memories from long-term memory by forming the right connetions.
        - "This is far from self-evident. If we look at the current state of education, especially the learning strategies most students employ, we see that the vast majority of all learning still aims to improve “storage strength,” even though it cannot be improved. It is still mostly about remembering isolated facts and not so much about building connections. This is what learning psychologists have rightfully given the derogative term “cramming:” the attempt to reinforce and solidify information in the brain by repetition. It is basically hammering facts into the brain as if they were carvings on an ancient stone tablet. Using fancy words and describing it as a “strengthening of the connections between neurons” does not change the fact that this attempt is futile."
            - How do we teach this then? By developing the summaries we usually teach together with our students.
            - See Small Teaching (James Lang)
    - Chapter 12
        - Since sequences and Follow-up-Notes are created automatically in a physical Zettelkasten, do we need to emulate that in Roam? Do we need to write up outlines/possibilities of structures? Is the All Pages index enough? Are Tags and Links enough? How vast has the tagging to be? How concise do the permanent notes have to be to be eligible in any context? Is that even possible? Or will it get too generalized?
        - "The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it? The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference."
            - Think like a writer!
            - Keep an eye on topics you already are interested in.
            - Tagging is crucial. 
            - Prefer Tagging to Linking, for it doesn't use words that are already there.
        - 1. The first type of links are those on notes that are giving you the overview of a topic. These are notes directly referred to from the index and usually used as an entry point into a topic that has already developed to such a degree that an overview is needed or at least becomes helpful. On a note like this, you can collect links to other relevant notes to this topic or question, preferably with a short indication of what to find on these notes (one or two words or a short sentence is sufficient). This kind of note helps to structure thoughts and can be seen as an in-between step towards the development of a manuscript. Above all, they help orientate oneself within the slip-box. You will know when you need to write one. Luhmann collected up to 25 links to other notes on these kind of entry notes. They don’t have to be written in one go as links can be added over time, which again shows how topics can grow organically. What we think is relevant for a topic and what is not depends on our current understanding and should be taken quite seriously: It defines an idea as much as the facts it is based on. What we regard as being relevant for a topic and how we structure it will change over time. This change might lead to another note with a different, more adequate topic structure, which then can be seen as a comment on the previous note. Thankfully, it won’t make all the other notes redundant. As mentioned before: All we have to do is to change the entry in the index to this new note and/ or indicate on the old note that we now consider a new structure more fitting.
            - Links/Tags: Topic (entry point), links to other notes (Embedded Block references), Comparison, Differences, Contradictions, Oppositions, Paradoxes,
        - "Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett’s partner and vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, stresses the importance of having a broad theoretical toolbox–not to be a good academic, but to have a good, pragmatic grip on reality. He regularly explains to students which mental models have proven most useful to help him understand markets and human behaviour. He advocates looking out for the most powerful concepts in every discipline and to try to understand them so thoroughly that they become part of our thinking. The moment one starts to combine these mental models and attach one’s experiences to them, one cannot help but gain what he calls “worldly wisdom.” The importance is to have not just a few, but a broad range of mental models in your head. Otherwise, you risk becoming too attached to one or two and see only what fits them. You would become the man with a hammer who sees nails everywhere (cf. Maslow, 1966, 15)."
            - What kind of mental models are there? is this connected to systems thinking? What tools are basic for the toolbox?
- **Link to something you find interesting:**
- **Literature notes:**
    - [[Introduction]]
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - Write your notes here
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - Write your notes here
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - Write your notes here
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - Etc
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
    - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
    - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
    - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
    - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
    - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
    - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
    - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
    - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]
    - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
    - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
    - [[Afterword]]
