- [[Book Prompts]] 
    - (rand)
- 
- [[Introduction]]
    - Success in your ''thing'' is not about who you are inherently/ ''talents. Its about what you DO in the weeks, months or even years before the opportunity, deadline, blank page arises
    - Doing and being smart about what you do is not about willpower either. and it shouldn't be.  doing meaningful work that you enjoy takes the tension out and makes it possible to get more things done. 
    - its easier to transfer knowledge written from one place to another as opposed to download it from your mind and onto a blank sheet of paper
    - 
- [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
    - "Having a clear structure to work in is completely different from making plans about something. If you make a plan, you impose a structure on yourself; it makes you inflexible. To keep going according to plan, you have to push yourself and employ willpower. This is not only demotivating, but also unsuitable for an open-ended process like research, thinking or studying in general, where we have to adjust our next steps with every new insight, understanding or achievement–which we ideally have on a regular basis and not just as an exception. Even though planning is often at odds with the very idea of research and learning, it is the mantra of most study guides and self-help books on academic writing. How do you plan for insight, which, by definition, cannot be anticipated? It is a huge misunderstanding that the only alternative to planning is aimless messing around. The challenge is to structure one’s workflow in a way that insight and new ideas can become the driving forces that push us forward. We do not want to make ourselves dependent on a plan that is threatened by the unexpected, like a new idea, discovery–or insight."
        - Structure I can relate to how to approach/examine pt. Anything can come out but you have a system/structure that helps you. Planning I can relate to management- you've filtered out options and are not looking for new things to pop out which will force you to go back to the structure and start again
        - people are taught to plan but this becomes inflexible. you cant plan for insight. but not having a structure is also not great as you have no idea where you are, a structure gives pointers but does not take over and block any new information
    - "Poor students do not have any of these problems. As long as they stick within the boundaries of their discipline and read only as much as they are told to (or less), no serious external system is required and writing can be done by sticking with the usual formulas of “how to write a scientific paper.” In fact, poor students often feel more successful (until they are tested), because they don’t experience much self-doubt. In psychology, this is known as the Dunning-Kruger effect (Kruger and Dunning, 1999). Poor students lack insight into their own limitations–as they would have to know about the vast amount of knowledge out there to be able to see how little they know in comparison. That means that those who are not very good at something tend to be overly confident, while those who have made an effort tend to underestimate their abilities. Poor students also have no trouble finding a question to write about: they neither lack opinions nor the confidence that they have already thought them through. They also won’t have trouble finding confirming evidence in the literature as they usually lack both interest and skill to detect and think through dis-confirming facts and arguments."
        - good students underestimate their abilities and struggle more when it comes to writing because they are aware of the vastness of views and realise their limited thinking which causes them to try harder to grapple and understand at a deeper level.
        - bad students loo for literature that confirms their belies/viewpoints and do not challenge their thinking. They do the bare minimum and are not aware of what else is out there that challenges what they believe is right.
        - "Good students, on the other hand, constantly raise the bar for themselves as they focus on what they haven’t learned and mastered yet. This is why high achievers who have had a taste of the vast amount of knowledge out there are likely to suffer from what psychologists call imposter syndrome, the feeling that you are not really up to the job, even though, of all people, they are (Clance and Imes 1978; Brems et al. 1994). This book is for you, the good students, ambitious academics and curious nonfiction writers who understand that insight doesn’t come easy and that writing is not only for proclaiming opinions, but the main tool to achieve insight worth sharing."
            - good students are always looking for what they haven't mastered and forever feeling like an imposter as they are painfully aware of how small they are next to all the knowldge that has cumulated over time
            - writing is not for stating your vies but the process of discovering the jewels of insight that you can share
    - "The second idea is equally important. Even the best tool will not improve your productivity considerably if you don’t change your daily routines the tool is embedded in, just as the fastest car won’t help you much if you don’t have proper roads to drive it on. Like every change in behaviour, a change in working habits means going through a phase where you are drawn back to your old ways. The new way of working might feel artificial at first and not necessarily like what you intuitively would do. That is normal. But as soon as you get used to taking smart notes, it will feel so much more natural that you will wonder how you were ever able to get anything done before. Routines require simple, repeatable tasks that can become automatic and fit together seamlessly (cf. Mata, Todd, and Lippke, 2010). Only when all the related work becomes part of an overarching and interlocked process, where all bottlenecks are removed, can significant change take place (which is why none of the typical “10 mind-blowing tools to improve your productivity” tips you can find all over the internet will ever be of much help)."
        - ''Only when all the related work becomes part of an overarching and interlocked process, where all bottlenecks are removed, can significant change take place''
            - Changing is simple but requires the slip box and your daily ritual
            - without changing how you think about the information you receieve and what you do with it ROUTINELY- youll be in the same spot
            - every piece (insight, idea,info) is a part of the puzzle- you cant lose it by not having a system to put it down once its in your hands
    - "The importance of an overarching workflow is the great insight of [[David Allen]]’s “Getting Things Done” (Allen, 2001). There are few serious knowledge workers left who haven’t heard of “GTD” and that is for a good reason: It works. The principle of [[GTD]] is to collect everything that needs to be taken care of in one place and process it in a standardised way. This doesn’t necessarily mean that we actually do everything we once intended to do, but it forces us to make clear choices and regularly check if our tasks still fit into the bigger picture. Only if we know that everything is taken care of, from the important to the trivial, can we let go and focus on what is right in front of us. Only if nothing else is lingering in our working memory and taking up valuable mental resources can we experience what Allen calls a “mind like water”-the state where we can focus on the work right in front of us without getting distracted by competing thoughts. The principle is simple but holistic. It is not a quick fix or a fancy tool. It doesn’t do the work for you. But it does provide a structure for our everyday work that deals with the fact that most distractions do not come so much from our environment, but our own minds."
        - having a system thats not set in stone/dteailed but guides your mind into how to deal with the things infront of you is key 
        - It allows your brain to stop doing what its not effective at (remembering, reminding etc) and do what it is unique to it such as consolidating, linking, creating. 
        - Dont lesson the value of your brain and hire a system  YOU CAN TRUST that deals with how to navigate information, people, events, deadlines (anything that distracts you from the work at hand)
        - Results-oriented/Purpose-driven/Massive Action Plan.
            - what do you want, why do you want it and what are you going to do
    - "When it comes to writing, everything, from research to proofreading, is closely connected. All the little steps must be linked in a way that will enable you to go seamlessly from one task to another, but still be kept separate enough to enable us to flexibly do what needs to be done in any given situation. And this is the other insight of David Allen: Only if you can trust your system, only if you really know that everything will be taken care of, will your brain let go and let you focus on the task at hand."
        - This and the above points. GTD not sufficient as in research- insights can't be planned for and steps are harder to break down. 
        - However, key is looking at it holistically and realising you need to address everything. your brain must trust the system to hand over the reigns to the new hire (the system)
        - we need a system thats more open ended and allows for not knowing the answers off the bat
    - "The best way to maintain the feeling of being in control is to stay in control. And to stay in control, it's better to keep your options open during the writing process rather than limit yourself to your first idea. It is in the nature of writing, especially insight-oriented writing, that questions change, the material we work with turns out to be very different from the one imagined or that new ideas emerge, which might change our whole perspective on what we do. Only if the work is set up in a way that is flexible enough to allow these small and constant adjustments can we keep our interest, motivation and work aligned–which is the precondition to effortless or almost effortless work."
        - You have to give your work/idea the space to grow and change and not put too much restrictions on it which will only limit you. But you have to have a system where its not just about the work but also maintaining the link between your interests and your reasons for doing it. 
    - "By adding these links between notes, Luhmann was able to add the same note to different contexts. While other systems start with a preconceived order of topics, Luhmann developed topics bottom up, then added another note to his slip-box, on which he would sort a topic by sorting the links of the relevant other notes."
        - Allow the process to show itself, don't design/restrict from the outset. Every new insight/idea, piece of work you read think about how it links to previous ideas/understanding and link them that way as opposed to deciding beforehand how to organize them
- [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
    - "At this point, it should become clear that you don’t need to wait for a genie to appear, as each step is clearly not only within your abilities, but also straightforward and well defined: Assemble notes and bring them into order, turn these notes into a draft, review it and you are done."
        - writing is not complicated if you break it down. gather your notes and sources and keep them in a sort of order,  develop/combine these notes into a continuous text and edit to make it a coherent argument 
    - "Granted, writing these notes is the main work. It will take enormous amounts of effort, time, patience and willpower, and you will probably break under the weight of this task. Just kidding. It is the easiest part of all. Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head. “Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible,” neuroscientist Neil Levy concludes in the introduction to the Oxford Handbook of Neuroethics, summarizing decades of research. Neuroscientists, psychologists and other experts on thinking have very different ideas about how our brains work, but, as Levy writes: “no matter how internal processes are implemented, (you) need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (2011, 270) If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. Richard Feynman stresses it as much as Benjamin Franklin. If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and that our thoughts make sense. And if we have to write anyway, why not use our writing to build up the resources for our future publications?"
        - Writing is essential for our brains to think, to create and do what its made to do. The magic of making notes is not the notes but what it enables our brains to do and explore.
        - "Externalizing my learning also allows me to be my own student. As a teacher, I am used to critiquing, guiding, and helping students. Somehow, it is so much difficult to go through that process with my own thoughts. However, when I write things out, suddenly it becomes much easier to “teach” myself. What do I still not understand? What are the steps I need to take to understand it more? How would I walk a student through gaining a deep understanding of the topic? Externalizing the ideas removes the ego." "Thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas is the main work of everyone who studies, does research or writes. If you write to improve all of these activities, you have a strong tailwind going for you. If you take your notes in a smart way, it will propel you forward." 
            - Writing helps you to see your own thinking clearly and makes it easier to challenge and improve yourself.
        - "3. Make permanent notes. Now turn to your slip-box. Go through the notes you made in step one or two (ideally once a day and before you forget what you meant) and think about how they relate to what is relevant for your own research, thinking or interests. This can soon be done by looking into the slip-box–it only contains what interests you anyway. The idea is not to collect, but to develop ideas, arguments and discussions. Does the new information contradict, correct, support or add to what you already have (in the slip-box or on your mind)? Can you combine ideas to generate something new? What questions are triggered by them?" 
            - Make permanent notes personal to you. Esp the end of each day, make it ritual to gather and reflect on how information is related to your interests/research . 
            - Trigger Q
                - does the new info support/correct/add or contradict your current thinking (look at slipbox to see)
                - can you combine to create something new
                - what questions do they trigger?
        - Write them like you were writing for someone else. with references and aim for brevity. File them behind related notes.
        - Make sure you are able to find it by linking to index or linked to an entry note in a topic
- [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
    - "That is pretty much it. To have an undistracted brain to think with and a reliable collection of notes to think in is pretty much all we need. Everything else is just clutter."
    - 
- [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
- [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
    - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
    - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
    - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
    - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
- [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
    - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
    - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
    - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
    - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
    - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
    - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
- [[Afterword]]
- 
- 
