- **Twitter:** @allossodan 
- Website:: danallosso.substack.com
- **Company:** Bemidji State University (Asst. Professor, History)
- Favourite books/authors:: __Sandman__, SF by Neal Stephenson, Hannu Rajaniemi, Liu Cixin
- Link to something you find interesting:: Hypothes.is, Pressbooks.com, OEGlobal.org
- **Videos/Podcasts about Roam and this Group:** https://youtu.be/K6VZ4PxCYME, https://youtu.be/r_YCQVszwNY
- Book Club 1 member? (y/n):: n
- [[Goals of Book Club]] 
    - I'm writing a revision of my __Short Handbook for Writing Essays in the Humanities and Social Sciences__, (https://mlpp.pressbooks.pub/writinghandbook/) which includes a chapter on reading and taking notes; but I'd like to make it more explicitly zettel-ish. I've been highlighting in the book with that project in mind. 
        - I do tend to agree with Sönke's point that notes are often more useful if they're pointed toward the things you're already thinking about. 
    - My goals for my note-taking and processing of the book are the same, but now I'm adding the further goal of getting to know the other people participating in this process and learning a little about what they're doing. And of course learning a lot more about Roam. 
- How to Take Smart Notes::
    - [[Introduction]] I’m going to paraphrase rather than quote.
        - He makes the points that writing begins long before the author sits down to a blank screen or empty page, and that most of the books on the topic tend to forget that. He may be positioning the competition in a slightly more negative light than it deserves, but I’ll grant that most of the advice undergraduates and wannabe writers get tends to begin with that notion of the panic caused by the blank page. 
        - I agree that a set of “smart and interconnected notes” is the solution to this problem. That has always been my experience. My father’s first chapter in his original “Short Handbook” that he wrote for students at UC Davis was about reading and taking notes. We’ve continued with that focus in the update and I’ll be adding “zettel” ideas to that in the next version I’m working on now.
        - I think the bigger insight here is that writing is thinking. It’s the medium in which we think rather than the product of thought that happens internally and only comes out once it is thoroughly processed into a product that’s ready for prime time. 
        - I also like the way he deflates the idea that writing “has to be hard” and has to take discipline. Somebody else (I don’t remember who at the moment — maybe they got it here?) has also been saying it doesn’t take a lot of willpower to do something you love. I also like the way he subtly crushes the idea that good writing is a gift of the muses or an expression of genius talent. It’s preparation and practice.  
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - Luhmann apparently said he never forced himself to do anything he didn’t like, but was nonetheless extremely productive (5). Ahrens later says Luhmann worked on a number of projects simultaneously and jumped between them as the spirit moved him. 
        - Ahrens talks about breaking down the process of writing a paper into small tasks that can be repeated regularly and relatively easily. I had a similar thought when I was first writing my dissertation. An average page has about two paragraphs on it. That means an average 300-page book has only 600 paragraphs. A paragraph is easy to write. Do five a day and you can complete a couple of books a year. 
        - Ahrens says a good student or an author interested in a variety of topics needs a system to keep track of an “ever-increasing pool of information” and allow the researcher to question these ideas, compare them, and combine them in new ways to generate new insights. These ideas are not necessarily just data points — usually they’re interpretations or the beginnings of theories. 
        - Ahrens claims that the simplicity of the slipbox structure allows for it to get out of the way of the content of the notes. It’s designed to be the simplest possible way to store atomized points, retrieve them, and work with them. 
            - I wonder if there are limitations to this? Are there ideas that are too complex? That don’t lend themselves to this type of summary? I’m not saying there are, but I’m raising the question.   
        - Ahrens says the book that launched the method into the world was Luhmann’s 2-volume [[__The Society of Society__]], 1997. I just ordered both volumes via ILL.
        - Luhmann had two boxes: one for bibliographical info and summary notes, and one for his own ideas, elaborating on those data points. He tended to write new “permanent notes” with his existing notes in mind. The point was to find at least one point of connection between the new idea and the ideas already in the box. This was not necessarily the ultimate, most important connection, but it was a starting point that anchored the new idea in the constellation of knowledge he was already working with. A truly random datum has little hope of being remembered or ever revisited. 
        - Whenever Luhmann added a new idea, he considered its context in terms of the ideas he was already interested in. This was physically manifested in his numbering system, but again, the initial position and number seems to have been only a first step, subject to modification (this argues against the idea of excessive key wording or “choosing folders” as we do in other note-taking systems).
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - Writing notes is an easy process, if you’ve read and understood a text. You prove to yourself (and later others) that you’ve understood what the author said by repeating it in your own words and then commenting on it. (22) 
        - Ahrens quotes neuroscientist Neil Levi sho claims that the human mind functions better with, and even relies, on “external scaffolding”. (23) 
        - Ahrens says “fleeting notes” are those you make while reading. He recommends this process instead of highlighting. Personally, I think there’s probably something to his claim that writing something by hand probably helps make it more persistent in memory than typing it, and certainly more than simply highlighting. OTOH, I’m not sure I’m convinced enough that it’s a game-changer that I’ll stop highlighting. 
        - The second stage is “literature notes”, which are what I’m calling [[Reading Note]]s. He does say to be selective and paraphrase, and he says to keep the bibliographic trail live, so you can back-trace the note to its source. 
        - Finally, [[Permanent Notes]] should be made within a day or two of making the [[Reading Notes]]. This is where you situate the new idea in the context of existing ideas that are already in the slipbox. In the analog box, you put the new note right behind the note it most relates to, and then you add more links if they seem called for. If you use indexes, maybe you want to add the new note (Ahrens isn’t particularly clear about this).
        - Ahrens says brainstorming for ideas can be replaced by looking in the slipbox for “chains of notes” and “clusters” of related ideas. You’re __finding evidence__ of pre-existing interest and connectedness, not forcing it.
        - Like Luhmann, who was apparently always working on multiple projects, Ahrens says we can use the slipbox to work on Multiple projects simultaneously, and it can help us find connections between our interests. He discusses a “critical mass that turns a mere collection of notes into an idea-generator.” I’ve had an intuitive sense of this possibility, and it’s nice to hear him affirm it, even if he gives no evidence to back up the claim. (26)
        - The point of the permanent notes, which Ahrens keeps returning to, is that it has been “filtered” by our interest, which makes it more likely to be useful to us. Hopefully, this will also result in us being able to make it interesting to others. 
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - I've got to say, I love the anecdote about the NASA project to engineer a zero-G ballpoint pen and the Soviet decision to just use a pencil! (28)
        - Ahrens lists four essential tools: paper and pen (or digital equivalent), reference management system, slip box, and an editor. The first step, using tool 1, is to capture fleeting notes on what you read. He emphasizes again that these are not meant to be permanent, but are markers or bookmarks. The reference system allows you to locate the info again and then to appropriately cite it. The slip box is where most of the work is done, and then the editor or word processor is where you assemble the output. 
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - etc 
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
            - He addresses the use of writing in assessment (student essays demonstrating their understanding), but this is a little misleading if the writing process is also the thinking process. I should be teaching my students to write down their thoughts as they're reading, and then think more about these observations and assemble them into essays when asked. If they do it this way, the paper is almost an afterthought. 
            - He says that studying doesn't prepare students for research and writing, it is research and writing. There should be no need to sit with a bunch of flashcards and memorize random facts, if the student has done this process -- assuming the instructor has also been smart and hasn't based the grade on a set of random questions that amount to little more than a trivia test.
                - But this is an element of many courses, where some level of factual knowledge may be a legitimate learning outcome. Even so, it seems students retain facts better when they're part of a narrative. That's easy enough to do in history.
            - Ahrens talks a lot in this chapter about focusing on the __writing__, in a way that seems like a response to something. I feel like I've not heard the first half of this argument, that he's responding to here, so it's less effective for me. 
            - I do think this relates a little bit to what I call "reading like a grad student", where you look fro the author's argument in introduction and conclusion, and then trace the development of that argument mostly by examining topic sentences of paragraphs. 
            - Ahrens concludes with the statement, in italics, that "__nothing counts other than the writing.__"
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - Ahrens uses the story of Malcolm McLean's development of the shipping container as a metaphor for the slip box. It's a good story and a pretty apt metaphor, although I think he goes a bit overboard on his analysis of the psychology of other people in the shipping industry who "failed" to make this innovative leap.
            - The important point seems to be that the slip box becomes more valuable as it grows. It's the opposite of the type of research where you store and then can find only the things you've already deliberately set in particular positions. 
                - This reminds me of the famous Dirk Gently saying about looking for things (which I was just unable to find in a half-hour of looking!), that if you go looking for something particular, there are so many tings in the world that it will be very difficult to find it. But if you go out looking for anything that might be useful, you're very likely to find something. (how's that for paraphrasing!?)
            - The slip box is designed to be a safe place to store ideas, so you can forget them until you need them. (41)
            - Fleeting notes are kind of trivial, and can be taken very casually since they're not going to last beyond the point where the ideas they carry are incorporated into a [[Permanent Note]]. These should be standardized and stored together, so they'll be useful in a variety of circumstances.
            - Ahrens makes a point of separating these types of notes, so the slip box can achieve critical mass. 
            - He also makes the point that it makes sense to revisit notes you've taken, to see if they still make sense or matter. I think I'll plan on doing this at the end of reading (fleeting to reading notes) and then at the stage where I turn my reading notes into permanent. Probably makes sense to review them a couple weeks later, and see if I see things or connections I didn't when I was just finishing the reading.
            - Fleeting notes are for capturing ideas when you're busy doing something else. Apps to aid in this? Drafts? Airr? Walling? Kindle and Instapaper highlights.
            - [[Permanent Notes]] should be written in a way that allows you to understand them even if you've completely forgotten the original context. (43) These notes need to be self-contained, since a lot of their value will depend on connections to other ideas you haven't had yet. 
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
            - Chapter 7: "Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch" means both that there's always been a lot of pre-work done before you sit down at a blank screen or empty sheet of paper, and also that nothing is completely original. We learn from others, and it's a bit artificial to draw boundaries around "our" ideas and someone else's. Of course, in academia we have conventions about intellectual property and plagiarism, which in general I think are soundly formulated. But we should take a moment, every now and again, to remember that we're community creatures, and our worlds are culturally constructed. 
                - I heard a story recently, I think it was in an interview Nathan Myhrvold did on a podcast in the last week or so (People I Nearly Admire), where he said some of the credit physicists get for being ground-breaking theorists has to do with coming along when there's a lot happening. He doesn't quite say that it was easy to get a new quantum-mechanical effect or principal named after you when the field was brand new, but the implication is that a new paradigm provides a lot of opportunities for the first people win the scene to elaborate it. 
            - Ahrens says that by focusing on what interests us and keeping a zettel-ish record, we'll discover "clusters" of ideas that gravitate toward topics AND provide the blocks with which to build a structure around that topic. 
            - I like the point that the brain isn't a particularly objective, consistent, or reliable tool for coming up with essays. This is pretty obvious, and is why we don't compose essays, arguments, novels, etc. in our heads. But it's probably worth repeating, especially the next time you're in a seminar where they give you a white-board or a giant post-it note and a set of markers and ask you to brainstorm (although I suppose the theory there might be that interaction is going to produce something greater than the sum of the parts).
            - I don't disagree with Ahrens' argument that students are not being well served when they're told to "squeeze a nonlinear process like writing into linear order". But on the other hand, I feel like this is becoming a bit of a straw-man. Yes, it's unsurprising that students feel stressed when asked to write on something they haven't had an opportunity to study and read and take notes on for months or years. But let's be realistic: in any given semester, they're going to be confronted with new topics and information that they've probably never considered before (at least, hopefully!), and then will be asked to respond to this new information in writing. This process, therefore, is something students should learn as early as possible in their careers and then practice from day one in a class. I need to design my courses to make this happen.
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
            - Chapter 8: Positive feedback loops, I agree, are valuable in both motivation to learn and in the learning itself. I also agree that the standard model of academic writing (definitely graduate, but undergrad term papers too) has way too few opportunities for interactions that will help students refine both their writing skills and their thinking on a topic.
            - I think the observation that expressing ideas in writing gives the students the opportunity to self-assess and affirm that they have understood an idea, even in the absence of instructor validation. Peer interaction can also be useful here, to take the pressure off the teacher to have to touch each and every comment the student makes in order to make it "real".
            - I also like the idea that learning happens best (and quickest and easiest) when we embed new information in a "latticework of mental models" (Ahrens quoting Charlie Munger here, 55). I suspect the isolated factoid is like a prehistoric hominid cut off from the tribe -- very unlikely to survive or reproduce.
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - Tasks. Multi-tasking makes us feel more productive, but studies have found this feeling is inaccurate. 
            - Ahrens also cites the "mere-exposure effect", which causes us to mistake familiarity for expertise. Makes me wonder how much of the time we're getting by on bluffs?
            - Organizing workflow seems to be important here. I've recently been watching videos about interstitial journaling, which is apparently useful to smooth the transitions between tasks and look us to actually put one thing down and stop thinking about it so we can move on to the next thing. Ahrens has said earlier that we have trouble dropping things out of short-term memory if they seem unresolved, and that even acknowledging an unresolved issue can trick our minds into putting it down and moving on (I think it was Ahrens who said this, but I can't put my finger on the page -- turns out it was still ahead of the spot I was at then, on p. 70).
            - Outlining is a process that requires us to step back from the individual blocks of thought and see how they can be stitched together into an argument. Seems like some of the elements of this quilt will be data and other parts would be propositions or arguments. Maybe it makes sense as I'm developing permanent notes to distinguish the two. I assume there's a life for important data as permanent notes, but I suppose it's possible they're really more like permanent reading notes, and the REAL permanent notes might be primarily assertions that are then supported by these collections of evidence. Have to think about how I want these to be available in the graph. 
            - There's a quote that's attributed to Dwight D. Eisenhower, but he says he "heard a long time ago in the Army: Plans are worthless, but planning is everything." [Eisenhower Papers](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=miua.4728417.1957.001&view=1up&seq=858) 
            - Ahrens goes on to talk about expertise, which he calls "embodied experience". This is what happens (after 10,000 hours?) when the response becomes automatic and you can do the thing without thinking about it. He tells an interesting story about teachers who are not experts themselves, who prefer the rule-following of students to the flexible adaptability of experts who no longer need to read the manual for the next step. 
                - This is an interesting anecdote, but I'm not sure how it relates? Unless he's claiming that this type of expertise is uniquely achievable due to some type of zettel network effect? This is certainly plausible, but I don't think it's proven here that the zettel is a uniquely advantageous tool to build this type of expertise. 
            - In his next section, Ahrens says that like attention, short-term memory is also limited. I should structure my class note taking and reading notes I assign to students with this in mind, to teach them this skill. Ahrens' point is that the external memory system of the slip box is a way to push stuff out of short-term and clear the log-jam. 
            - The things we understand and remember, he says, are connected to other things. There's a very compelling visual analogy with the networks of neurons. Ahrens suggests that it's the process of connecting ideas as we add them that probably gives the slip box its power. 
                - In order to add a new note, we're forcing ourselves to connect it to a note already in the box (should I require myself to do this when adding a new permanent note?). We should be asking ourselves questions like, "How does this fact fit into my idea of...?" Questions of context, complementarity or conflict between ideas, reiteration or modification of other ideas, implications of the new idea on other items in the box.  
                - Ahrens connects this with [[David Allen]]'s GTD, which I should put on my list of things to read soonish. 
                    - This is where he says that by writing a note about unresolved issues, so we can stop worrying about them. (70) This is a good argument for [[Interstitial Journaling]]. 
            - Ahrens says we're breaking down the big and amorphous task, writing, into a bunch of smaller, discrete sub-tasks that we can complete in a reasonable time and check off our list. He also advises documenting these task completions to both celebrate them (motivation) and get them out of short-term memory. 
            - Once we begin to trust these second brain systems to reliably keep track of this material (our task lists, info, etc.), we can relax. Ahrens talks about "ego depletion", which is a sort-of psychic muscle-fatigue we can avoid by offloading a bunch of routine decisions to scaffolding systems. A reliable and standardized workflow (or work environment) is less taxing on our attention and leaves more energy to actually do the task.
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
    - [[Afterword]]
- Fleeting Notes:: 
- Literature Notes::
