- Technology strategy consultant in the Washington, DC area. AssociationsRewired.com if you're interested.
- Tiago is right, Roam is a second brain. I'd add a more visceral component - Roam is like having a digital exoskeleton. Everything, work and personal are in one database. There is no wall between the two. And, there shouldn't be - because networked thought shouldn't, and doesn't respect barriers of any kind. As you get older, the one rule that becomes increasingly clear, is everything is connected.  The overlap of my consulting, with my personal relationships, with my sailing students (when it's nice out), with politics, it all feeds off of, and grows off of everything else. In fact, I'd challenge anyone to try to put any one piece in a box. Remember the old boy's joke where you walk up to a muscle-bound guy and ask "Think you're strong?", then you spit and say "Let me see you pick that up". Same challenge. Can't be done. (Networked thought should not be confused with reason - the human mind apparently has unlimited capacity to box up the latter ;-).
- Since Roam has gone into production I've been perusing all the Roam related sites, going through Nat's, anonymou.s' and everyone's training, processes, workflows, tagging, you name it. Grabbing code and CSS here and there on Github and Slack. Pulling in any bits that resonate. What I have is a second brain that fits me like a glove. Every day more and more synapses develop between the two brains. Like any ecosystem, every contribution combines to create something greater than the sum of the ingredients.   
