- [[Directory]]
    - **Name:** Ayomide “Doc Ayomide” Adebayo
    - **Website:** https://docayomide.com/
    - **Twitter:** https://twitter.com/docayomide
    - Location:: [[Ipswich, UK]]
    - Book Club 1 member? (y/n):: y
- [[Directory]]
    - Name:: [[Doc Ayomide]]
        - Full name [[Ayomide Adebayo]]—added my professional title when creating my website back in the day because Ayomide.com was taken.
    - Email:: hello@docayomide.com
    - Twitter:: [@DocAyomide](https://twitter.com/docayomide)
    - Location:: [[Ipswich, UK]]
    - Interests::[[Reading]], [[Psychiatry]], [[Psychology]], [[Theology]], [[Writing]], [[Story Telling]]
    - Book Club 1 member? (y/n):: y
    - Company:: NHS Norfolk & Suffolk Foundation Trust
    - Favourite books::  [[Mere Christianity]], [[A Wizard of Earthsea]], [[Lord of the Rings]], [[How to Take Smart Notes]], everything by [[The Black Swan]]
    - Link to something you find interesting:: [Andy Matuschak’s website](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/)
    - Website:: [DocAyomide.com](https://docayomide.com)
- [[Doc Ayomide/Zettels]]
    - # #Zettels 
        - #Creativity [Creativity is rooted in the twin disciplines of observation and articulation, and by mastering note-taking we hone our skill in both](((3KHoTzYpu))).
            - As a side effect, we are also set free to create more prolifically, because despite its potential high impact, writing a note is itself a low-stakes activity, the kind of thing we can do poorly but can hardly “fail” at—which takes care of one of the biggest hurdles to creating: the fear of not being good enough. Mastering note-taking helps us focus on the process, trusting the outcome to take care of itself. As Ali Abdaal puts it, our job is to “Document, not create.” 
            - #[[Reference Notes]] [[Introduction]] [Every intellectual endeavour starts with a note.](((hG7TRPF5I)))
            - #[[Literature Notes]] 
                - If words are the atoms of writing, notes are idea molecules: standalone blocks that are able to stand on their own. But the important thing to note about notes is that, at their most astute, they represent an act not of creation but of observation—of insight, of seeing something for what it really is, for what it can be, and then expressing that as clearly as language will permit. It is the result of a series of such observations that produces what we recognise as great writing.
            - #[[Fleeting Notes]]
                - the greatest art begins with the smallest observations—[the humble note is the building block of all writing](((0sdY9D9ST))) — on [[November 30th, 2020]]
                    - mastering note taking as an art is easily the wax on-wax off that leads to the beautiful karate of great writing
                        - Could another metaphor be that notes in writing are the equivalent of chords in music? (or is the metaphor broken by the fact that there is a finite (?) number of chords while notes are potentially infinite?)
                        - in a sense this means that note taking in itself is the art of making observations, and getting better at it is really about getting better at observing 
                        - this brings to mind how photography is rooted in seeing: learning how to be a better photographer is really about learning how to see clearer
                        - I'm reminded of Austin Mann talking about how he got interested in photography as part of his conversion to [[Christianity]] a believer in Jesus, and becoming interested in light versus darkness, on both a metaphysical and a physical level
                        - This is what helps us overcome [the fear of the blank page](((McjPfqJjt))): the question we have to answer as creators shifts from, “What do I have to say?” to “What can I see?” 
                            - This is what Ali Abdaal said in his talk on Minimum Viable Video on [[November 24th, 2020]] that he thinks of his real work as documenting, not creating
                            - thinking this way also significantly lowers the threshold for what is within our reach—the ability to observe is already inbuilt in us as part of being alive, all we have to do is get better at it, unlike the question of if we are “creative” which we can easily feel is out of our grasp
                        - creation therefore begins, so to speak, with saying “let there be light”—with seeing something in a new light, as it really is
                            - like CS Lewis says, originality comes not by aiming at it, but by aiming to tell the truth—but telling the truth begins with __seeing__ it
                - true complexity is built on simplicity—the simpler our beginning the more complex structures we can build
                    - implication here would be that the path 
- Doc Ayomide/Zettels
    - 
        - "The trick is not to try to break with old habits and also not to use willpower to force oneself to do something else, but to strategically build up new habits that have a chance to replace the old ones. The goal here is to get into the habit of fetching pen and paper whenever we read something, to write down the most important and interesting aspects. If we manage to establish a routine in this first step, it becomes much easier to develop the urge to turn these findings into permanent notes and connect them with other notes in the slip-box. It is not so difficult to get used to thinking within an external memory of notes, as the advantages become obvious quite quickly. As soon as we have developed a new routine, we can do what intuitively feels right, which requires no effort. Watching others reading books and doing nothing other than underlining some sentences or making unsystematic notes that will end up nowhere will soon be a painful sight."
    - 
- [[Book Prompts]]
- 
    - "Template - Apply children as text"
- [[Live Session 5]] [[November 29th, 2020]]
    - [[Writing practice]]
        - Reflect on your own reading and writing practice and habits with this book over the last month.
            - I started late getting into the book, only just this week, but I copied out my notes from my first read in 2018. 
        - Reflect on your Zettel process
            - I’m just rethinking my [[Zettel]] process after a call with [[@Beau Haan]] in which he helped me think more clearly about maximising Roam for [[Zettelkasten]]. His idea was to use what Roam is best at
        - Why do you want a Zettelkasten?
- [[Writing Prompts]]
- Call with Beau Haan [[December 2nd, 2020]]
    - 
- **Literature Notes:**
- #[[Fleeting Notes]]
    - "To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes:"
        - "1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two."
        - "2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box."
        - "3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished."
- #[[Literature Notes]]
    - My highlights from previously reading [[How to Take Smart Notes: One Simple Technique to Boost Writing, Learning and Thinking - for Students, Academics and Nonfiction Book Writers]] in 2018
        - Every intellectual endeavour starts with a note. 
        - Most people struggle for much more mundane reasons, and one is the myth of the blank page itself. They struggle because they believe, as they are made to believe, that writing starts with a blank page. If you believe that you have indeed nothing at hand to fill it, you have a very good reason to panic. Just having it all in your head is not enough, as getting it down on paper is the hard bit. That is why __good, productive writing is based on good note-taking__. 
        - The best way to deal with complexity is to keep things as simple as possible and to follow a few basic principles. __The simplicity of the structure allows complexity to build up where we want it__: on the content level. 
        - the secret to a successful organization lies in the holistic perspective. Everything needs to be taken care of, otherwise the neglected bits will nag us until the unimportant tasks become urgent. Even the best tools won’t make much of a difference if they are used in isolation. Only if they are embedded in a well-conceived working process can the tools play out their strengths. 
        - Studies on highly successful people have proven again and again that success is not the result of strong willpower and the ability to overcome resistance, but rather the result of smart working environments that avoid resistance in the first place (cf. Neal et al. 2012; Painter et al. 2002; Hearn et al. 1998). 
        - most people do not expect much from simple ideas. They rather assume that impressive results must have equally impressively complicated means. 
        - How does the slip-box, the heart of this system, work? Strictly speaking, Luhmann had two slip-boxes: a bibliographical one, which contained the references and brief notes on the content of the literature, and the main one in which he collected and generated his ideas, mainly in response to what he read. The notes were written on index cards and stored in wooden boxes. Whenever he read something, he would write the bibliographic information on one side of a card and make brief notes about the content on the other side (Schmidt 2013, 170). These notes would end up in the bibliographic slip-box. 
        - If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. 
        - Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. __Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use__ in your own thinking or writing. __Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. Be extra selective with quotes__ – don’t copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place – your reference system. 
        - See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - as Wilhelm von Humboldt, founder of the Humboldt University of Berlin and brother to the great explorer Alexander von Humboldt, put it, the professor is not there for the student and the student not for the professor. Both are only there for the truth. And truth is always a public matter. 
        - Focusing on writing as if nothing else counts does not necessarily mean you should do everything else less well, but it certainly makes you do everything else differently. 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. 
        - McLean wasn’t the only one who had the idea to use containers on ships. Many others tried it, too, and almost all gave up on the idea soon after – not because they were too stubborn to accept a great idea, but because they lost too much money on it (Levinson, 2006, 45f). The idea was simple, but it wasn’t easy to put it efficiently into practice. In hindsight, we know why they failed: The ship owners tried to integrate the container into their usual way of working without changing the infrastructure and their routines. 
        - In the old system, the question is: Under which topic do I store this note? In the new system, the question is: In which context will I want to stumble upon it again? 
        - The slip-box is designed to present you with ideas you have already forgotten, allowing your brain to focus on thinking instead of remembering. 
        - underlining sentences or writing comments in the margins are also just fleeting notes and do nothing to elaborate on a text. They will very soon become completely useless – unless you do something with them. If you already know that you will not go back to them, don’t take these kind of notes in the first place. 
        - Most ideas will not stand the test of time, while others might become the seed for a major project. Unfortunately, they are not easy to distinguish right away. That is why the threshold to write an idea down has to be as low as possible, but it is equally crucial to elaborate on them within a day or two. A good indication that a note has been left unprocessed too long is when you no longer understand what you meant or it appears banal. In the first case, you forgot what it was supposed to remind you of. In the second case, you forgot the context that gave it its meaning. 
        - an archive – the bin for the indecisive). 
        - There is one reliable sign if you managed to structure your workflow according to the fact that writing is not a linear process, but a circular one: the problem of finding a topic is replaced by the problem of having too many topics to write about. 
        - You may remember from school the difference between an exergonic and an endergonic reaction. In the first case, you constantly need to add energy to keep the process going. In the second case, the reaction, once triggered, continues by itself and even releases energy. The dynamics of work are not so different. Sometimes we feel like our work is draining our energy and we can only move forward if we put more and more energy into it. But sometimes it is the opposite. Once we get into the workflow, it is as if the work itself gains momentum, pulling us along and sometimes even energizing us. This is the kind of dynamic we are looking for. 
        - Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - Ironically, it is therefore often the highly gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck. Having been praised for what they are (talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing themselves to new challenges and the possibility of learning from failure. Embracing a growth mindset means to get pleasure out of changing for the better (which is mostly inwardly rewarding) instead of getting pleasure in being praised (which is outwardly rewarding). The orientation towards the latter makes one stick to safe, proven areas. The orientation towards the first draws the attention to the areas most in need of improvement. To seek as many opportunities to learn as possible is the most reliable long-term growth strategy. 
        - Reading with a pen in the hand, for example, forces, us to think about what we read and check upon our understanding. It is the simplest test: We tend to think we understand what we read – until we try to rewrite it in our own words. By doing this, we not only get a better sense of our ability to understand, but also increase our ability to clearly and concisely express our understanding 
        - We unfortunately tend to confuse familiarity with skill. 
        - When I point out problems within the argument, an ill-defined term or just an ambiguous passage, students usually refer to what they mean first and only shift their focus to what they have written when they fully understand that what they mean is completely irrelevant within the scientific community. 
        - It is also easier to focus on finding the right words if we don’t have to think about the structure of the text at the same time, which is why a printed outline of the manuscript should be always in front of our eyes. We have to know what we don’t have to write about at the moment, because we know that we will take care of that in another part of our text. 
        - Unfortunately, the most common way people organise their writing is by making plans. Although planning is almost universally recommended by study guides, it’s the equivalent of putting oneself on rails. __Don’t make plans. Become an expert.__ 
        - The moment we stop making plans is the moment we start to learn. 
        - we don’t actually have to finish tasks to convince our brains to stop thinking about them. All we have to do is to write them down in a way that convinces us that it will be taken care of. That’s right: The brain doesn't distinguish between an actual finished task and one that is postponed by taking a note. By writing something down, we literally get it out of our heads. 
        - While content-related decisions have to be made (on what is more and what is less important in an article, on the connections between notes, the structure of a text, etc.), most organisational decisions can be made up front, once and for all, by deciding on one system. By always using the same notebook for making quick notes, always extracting the main ideas from a text in the same way and always turning them into the same kind of permanent notes, which are always dealt with in the same manner, the number of decisions during a work session can be greatly reduced. That leaves us with much more mental energy that we can direct towards more useful tasks, like trying to solve the problems in question. 
        - To get a good paper written, you only have to rewrite a good draft; to get a good draft written, you only have to turn a series of notes into a continuous text. And as a series of notes is just the rearrangement of notes you already have in your slip-box, all you really have to do is have a pen in your hand when you read. 
        - the mere copying of quotes almost always changes their meaning by stripping them out of context, even though the words aren’t changed. 
        - Luhmann describes this step as follows: “I always have a slip of paper at hand, on which I note down the ideas of certain pages. On the backside I write down the bibliographic details. After finishing the book I go through my notes and think how these notes might be relevant for already written notes in the slip-box. It means that I always read with an eye towards possible connections in the slip-box.” 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - more often than not, reading is not accompanied by taking notes, which is, in terms of writing, almost as valuable as not having read at all. 
        - This is a good rule of thumb: If insight becomes a threat to your academic or writing success, you are doing it wrong. 
        - philosopher Immanuel Kant described in his famous text about the Enlightenment: “Nonage [immaturity] is the inability to use one’s own understanding without another’s guidance. This nonage is self-imposed if its cause lies not in lack of understanding but in indecision and lack of courage to use one’s own mind without another’s guidance. Dare to know! (Sapere aude.) ‘Have the courage to use your own understanding,’ is therefore the motto of the Enlightenment.” (Kant 1784) 
        - Permanent notes, too, are directed towards an audience ignorant of the thoughts behind the text and unaware of the original context, only equipped with a general knowledge of the field. The only difference is that the audience here consists of our future selves, 
        - “The principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool,” Feynman stressed in a speech to young scientists 
        - Reading, especially rereading, can easily fool us into believing we understand a text. Rereading is especially dangerous because of the mere-exposure effect: The moment we become familiar with something, we start believing we also understand it. On top of that, we also tend to like it more 
        - When we try to answer a question before we know how to, we will later remember the answer better, even if our attempt failed (Arnold and McDermott 2013). If we put effort into the attempt of retrieving information, we are much more likely to remember it in the long run, even if we fail to retrieve it without help in the end (Roediger and Karpicke 2006). Even without any feedback, we will be better off if we try to remember something ourselves (Jang et al. 2012). 
        - Experienced academic readers usually read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches, while inexperienced readers tend to adopt the question of a text and the frames of the argument and take it as a given. What good readers can do is spot the limitations of a particular approach and see what is not mentioned in the text. 
        - Any thought of a certain complexity requires writing. Coherent arguments require the language to be fixed, and only if something is written down is it fixed enough to be discussed independently from the author. The brain alone is too eager to make us feel good – even if it is by politely ignoring inconsistencies in our thinking. Only in the written form can an argument be looked at with a certain distance – literally. 
        - Transferring ideas into the external memory also allows us to forget them. And even though it sounds paradoxical, forgetting actually facilitates long-term learning. 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - Forgetting, then, would not be the loss of a memory, but the erection of a mental barrier between the conscious mind and our long-term memory. Psychologists call this mechanism active inhibition (cf. MacLeod, 2007). It is easy to understand what it is good for: Without a very thorough filter, our brains would constantly be flooded by memories, making it impossible to focus on anything in our surroundings. 
        - This is far from self-evident. If we look at the current 
        - If you focus your time and energy on understanding, you cannot help but learn. But if you focus your time and energy on learning without trying to understand, you will not only not understand, but also probably not learn. And the effects are cumulative. 
        - The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. __Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it?__ The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference. 
        - As writers, we approach the question of keywords differently. We look at our slip-box for already existing lines of thought and think about the questions and problems already on our minds to which a new note might contribute. 
        - Assigning keywords is much more than just a bureaucratic act. It is a crucial part of the thinking process, which often leads to a deeper elaboration of the note itself and the connection to other notes. 
        - If we forget about an idea and have it again, our brains get as excited as if we are having it the first time. 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - Another piece of advice is not a feature of the slip-box and might sound banal, but it is crucial: Make sure that you really see what you think you see and describe it as plainly and factually as possible. Double-check if necessary. That this isn’t as obvious as it sounds will become clearer by the fact that __the ability to truly see what is in front of one’s eyes is often listed as a trait of experts__. And that is easily explained by the fact that our __perception does not follow the order of seeing first and interpreting second. It does both at the same time: We always perceive something as something__ – our __interpretation is instantaneous__. 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - To really understand a text is therefore a constant revision of our first interpretation. We have to train ourselves to get used to seeing this difference and to hold back our ingrained urge to jump to conclusions. To be able to see what we see instead of what we expect to see is indeed a skill in itself, not like a character trait of being “open-minded.” Those who think of themselves as being open-minded are often even more prone to stick to their first understanding as they believe to be without natural prejudices and therefore don’t see the need to counterbalance them. 
        - Sometimes, it is more important to rediscover the problems for which we already have a solution than to think solely about the problems that are present to us. Problems rarely get solved directly, anyway. Most often, the crucial step forward is to redefine the problem in such a way that an already existing solution can be employed. The first question should always be directed towards the question itself: What kind of answer can you expect from asking a question in this particular way? What is missing? 
        - Making things more complicated than they are can be a way to avoid the underlying complexity of simple ideas. 
        - A clear structure allows us to explore the internal possibilities of something. Even the act of breaking with convention depends on it. 
        - The biggest threat to creativity and scientific progress is therefore the opposite: a lack of structure and restrictions. Without structure, we cannot differentiate, compare or experiment with ideas. Without restrictions, we would never be forced to make the decision on what is worth pursuing and what is not. Indifference is the worst environment for insight. 
        - If we accompany every step of our work with the question, “What is interesting about this?” and everything we read with the question, “What is so relevant about this that it is worth noting down?” we do not just choose information according to our interest. By elaborating on what we encounter, we also discover aspects we didn’t know anything about before and therefore develop our interests along the way. It would be quite sad if we did not change our interests during research. 
        - “It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copybooks and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.” (Whitehead) 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - The most reliable predictor of our behaviour in the immediate future is – surprise, surprise – the intention to do it. If we decide to go to the gym now, the chance is that we really do go to the gym now. But this is, unfortunately, only true for the very immediate future. When it comes to the long run, researchers struggle to find any measurable connection between our intentions and our actual behaviour (Ji and Wood 2007; Neal et al. 2012). There is one exception, though: we most certainly act according to our intention if we happen to intend to do exactly what we used to do before. 
            - **Tags**: #[[favorite]]
        - Learning, thinking and writing should not be about accumulating knowledge, but about becoming a different person with a different way of thinking. 
        - The more pressure we feel, the more we tend to stick to our old routines – even when these routines caused the problems and the stress in the first place. This is known as the tunnel effect (Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). But Mullainathan and Shafir, who examined this phenomenon thoroughly, also found a way out of it: Change is possible when the solution appears to be simple. 
    - [[Introduction]]
        - Every intellectual endeavour starts with a note. 
        - Most people struggle for much more mundane reasons, and one is the myth of the blank page itself. They struggle because they believe, as they are made to believe, that writing starts with a blank page. If you believe that you have indeed nothing at hand to fill it, you have a very good reason to panic. Just having it all in your head is not enough, as getting it down on paper is the hard bit. That is why __good, productive writing is based on good note-taking__. 
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - The best way to deal with complexity is to keep things as simple as possible and to follow a few basic principles. __The simplicity of the structure allows complexity to build up where we want it__: on the content level. 
        - the secret to a successful organization lies in the holistic perspective. Everything needs to be taken care of, otherwise the neglected bits will nag us until the unimportant tasks become urgent. Even the best tools won’t make much of a difference if they are used in isolation. Only if they are embedded in a well-conceived working process can the tools play out their strengths. 
        - Studies on highly successful people have proven again and again that success is not the result of strong willpower and the ability to overcome resistance, but rather the result of smart working environments that avoid resistance in the first place (cf. Neal et al. 2012; Painter et al. 2002; Hearn et al. 1998). 
        - most people do not expect much from simple ideas. They rather assume that impressive results must have equally impressively complicated means. 
        - How does the slip-box, the heart of this system, work? Strictly speaking, Luhmann had two slip-boxes: a bibliographical one, which contained the references and brief notes on the content of the literature, and the main one in which he collected and generated his ideas, mainly in response to what he read. The notes were written on index cards and stored in wooden boxes. Whenever he read something, he would write the bibliographic information on one side of a card and make brief notes about the content on the other side (Schmidt 2013, 170). These notes would end up in the bibliographic slip-box. 
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. 
        - Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. __Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use__ in your own thinking or writing. __Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. Be extra selective with quotes__ – don’t copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place – your reference system. 
        - See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. 
        - 
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - More is unnecessary, less is impossible. 
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
            - as Wilhelm von Humboldt, founder of the Humboldt University of Berlin and brother to the great explorer Alexander von Humboldt, put it, the professor is not there for the student and the student not for the professor. Both are only there for the truth. And truth is always a public matter. 
            - Focusing on writing as if nothing else counts does not necessarily mean you should do everything else less well, but it certainly makes you do everything else differently. 
            - And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. 
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - McLean wasn’t the only one who had the idea to use containers on ships. Many others tried it, too, and almost all gave up on the idea soon after – not because they were too stubborn to accept a great idea, but because they lost too much money on it (Levinson, 2006, 45f). The idea was simple, but it wasn’t easy to put it efficiently into practice. In hindsight, we know why they failed: The ship owners tried to integrate the container into their usual way of working without changing the infrastructure and their routines. 
            - In the old system, the question is: Under which topic do I store this note? In the new system, the question is: In which context will I want to stumble upon it again? 
            - The slip-box is designed to present you with ideas you have already forgotten, allowing your brain to focus on thinking instead of remembering. 
            - underlining sentences or writing comments in the margins are also just fleeting notes and do nothing to elaborate on a text. They will very soon become completely useless – unless you do something with them. If you already know that you will not go back to them, don’t take these kind of notes in the first place. 
            - Most ideas will not stand the test of time, while others might become the seed for a major project. Unfortunately, they are not easy to distinguish right away. That is why the threshold to write an idea down has to be as low as possible, but it is equally crucial to elaborate on them within a day or two. A good indication that a note has been left unprocessed too long is when you no longer understand what you meant or it appears banal. In the first case, you forgot what it was supposed to remind you of. In the second case, you forgot the context that gave it its meaning. 
            - an archive – the bin for the indecisive). 
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
            - There is one reliable sign if you managed to structure your workflow according to the fact that writing is not a linear process, but a circular one: the problem of finding a topic is replaced by the problem of having too many topics to write about. 
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
            - You may remember from school the difference between an exergonic and an endergonic reaction. In the first case, you constantly need to add energy to keep the process going. In the second case, the reaction, once triggered, continues by itself and even releases energy. The dynamics of work are not so different. Sometimes we feel like our work is draining our energy and we can only move forward if we put more and more energy into it. But sometimes it is the opposite. Once we get into the workflow, it is as if the work itself gains momentum, pulling us along and sometimes even energizing us. This is the kind of dynamic we are looking for. 
            - Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, 
            - Ironically, it is therefore often the highly gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck. Having been praised for what they are (talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing themselves to new challenges and the possibility of learning from failure. Embracing a growth mindset means to get pleasure out of changing for the better (which is mostly inwardly rewarding) instead of getting pleasure in being praised (which is outwardly rewarding). The orientation towards the latter makes one stick to safe, proven areas. The orientation towards the first draws the attention to the areas most in need of improvement. To seek as many opportunities to learn as possible is the most reliable long-term growth strategy. 
            - Reading with a pen in the hand, for example, forces, us to think about what we read and check upon our understanding. It is the simplest test: We tend to think we understand what we read – until we try to rewrite it in our own words. By doing this, we not only get a better sense of our ability to understand, but also increase our ability to clearly and concisely express our understanding 
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - Unfortunately, the most common way people organise their writing is by making plans. Although planning is almost universally recommended by study guides, it’s the equivalent of putting oneself on rails. __Don’t make plans. Become an expert.__ 
            - We unfortunately tend to confuse familiarity with skill. 
            - When I point out problems within the argument, an ill-defined term or just an ambiguous passage, students usually refer to what they mean first and only shift their focus to what they have written when they fully understand that what they mean is completely irrelevant within the scientific community. 
            - It is also easier to focus on finding the right words if we don’t have to think about the structure of the text at the same time, which is why a printed outline of the manuscript should be always in front of our eyes. We have to know what we don’t have to write about at the moment, because we know that we will take care of that in another part of our text. 
            - The moment we stop making plans is the moment we start to learn. 
            - we don’t actually have to finish tasks to convince our brains to stop thinking about them. All we have to do is to write them down in a way that convinces us that it will be taken care of. That’s right: The brain doesn't distinguish between an actual finished task and one that is postponed by taking a note. By writing something down, we literally get it out of our heads. 
            - While content-related decisions have to be made (on what is more and what is less important in an article, on the connections between notes, the structure of a text, etc.), most organisational decisions can be made up front, once and for all, by deciding on one system. By always using the same notebook for making quick notes, always extracting the main ideas from a text in the same way and always turning them into the same kind of permanent notes, which are always dealt with in the same manner, the number of decisions during a work session can be greatly reduced. That leaves us with much more mental energy that we can direct towards more useful tasks, like trying to solve the problems in question. 
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
            - To get a good paper written, you only have to rewrite a good draft; to get a good draft written, you only have to turn a series of notes into a continuous text. And as a series of notes is just the rearrangement of notes you already have in your slip-box, all you really have to do is have a pen in your hand when you read. 
            - the mere copying of quotes almost always changes their meaning by stripping them out of context, even though the words aren’t changed. 
            - Luhmann describes this step as follows: “I always have a slip of paper at hand, on which I note down the ideas of certain pages. On the backside I write down the bibliographic details. After finishing the book I go through my notes and think how these notes might be relevant for already written notes in the slip-box. It means that I always read with an eye towards possible connections in the slip-box.” 
            - more often than not, reading is not accompanied by taking notes, which is, in terms of writing, almost as valuable as not having read at all. 
            - This is a good rule of thumb: If insight becomes a threat to your academic or writing success, you are doing it wrong. 
            - philosopher Immanuel Kant described in his famous text about the Enlightenment: “Nonage [immaturity] is the inability to use one’s own understanding without another’s guidance. This nonage is self-imposed if its cause lies not in lack of understanding but in indecision and lack of courage to use one’s own mind without another’s guidance. Dare to know! (Sapere aude.) ‘Have the courage to use your own understanding,’ is therefore the motto of the Enlightenment.” (Kant 1784) 
            - Permanent notes, too, are directed towards an audience ignorant of the thoughts behind the text and unaware of the original context, only equipped with a general knowledge of the field. The only difference is that the audience here consists of our future selves, 
            - “The principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool,” Feynman stressed in a speech to young scientists 
            - Reading, especially rereading, can easily fool us into believing we understand a text. Rereading is especially dangerous because of the mere-exposure effect: The moment we become familiar with something, we start believing we also understand it. On top of that, we also tend to like it more 
            - When we try to answer a question before we know how to, we will later remember the answer better, even if our attempt failed (Arnold and McDermott 2013). If we put effort into the attempt of retrieving information, we are much more likely to remember it in the long run, even if we fail to retrieve it without help in the end (Roediger and Karpicke 2006). Even without any feedback, we will be better off if we try to remember something ourselves (Jang et al. 2012). 
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
            - Experienced academic readers usually read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches, while inexperienced readers tend to adopt the question of a text and the frames of the argument and take it as a given. What good readers can do is spot the limitations of a particular approach and see what is not mentioned in the text. 
            - Any thought of a certain complexity requires writing. Coherent arguments require the language to be fixed, and only if something is written down is it fixed enough to be discussed independently from the author. The brain alone is too eager to make us feel good – even if it is by politely ignoring inconsistencies in our thinking. Only in the written form can an argument be looked at with a certain distance – literally. 
            - Transferring ideas into the external memory also allows us to forget them. And even though it sounds paradoxical, forgetting actually facilitates long-term learning. 
            - Forgetting, then, would not be the loss of a memory, but the erection of a mental barrier between the conscious mind and our long-term memory. Psychologists call this mechanism active inhibition (cf. MacLeod, 2007). It is easy to understand what it is good for: Without a very thorough filter, our brains would constantly be flooded by memories, making it impossible to focus on anything in our surroundings. 
            - This is far from self-evident. If we look at the current 
            - If you focus your time and energy on understanding, you cannot help but learn. But if you focus your time and energy on learning without trying to understand, you will not only not understand, but also probably not learn. And the effects are cumulative. 
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]
            - The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. __Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it?__ The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference. 
            - As writers, we approach the question of keywords differently. We look at our slip-box for already existing lines of thought and think about the questions and problems already on our minds to which a new note might contribute. 
            - Assigning keywords is much more than just a bureaucratic act. It is a crucial part of the thinking process, which often leads to a deeper elaboration of the note itself and the connection to other notes. 
            - If we forget about an idea and have it again, our brains get as excited as if we are having it the first time. 
            - Another piece of advice is not a feature of the slip-box and might sound banal, but it is crucial: Make sure that you really see what you think you see and describe it as plainly and factually as possible. Double-check if necessary. That this isn’t as obvious as it sounds will become clearer by the fact that __the ability to truly see what is in front of one’s eyes is often listed as a trait of experts__. And that is easily explained by the fact that our __perception does not follow the order of seeing first and interpreting second. It does both at the same time: We always perceive something as something__ – our __interpretation is instantaneous__. 
            - To really understand a text is therefore a constant revision of our first interpretation. We have to train ourselves to get used to seeing this difference and to hold back our ingrained urge to jump to conclusions. To be able to see what we see instead of what we expect to see is indeed a skill in itself, not like a character trait of being “open-minded.” Those who think of themselves as being open-minded are often even more prone to stick to their first understanding as they believe to be without natural prejudices and therefore don’t see the need to counterbalance them. 
            - Sometimes, it is more important to rediscover the problems for which we already have a solution than to think solely about the problems that are present to us. Problems rarely get solved directly, anyway. Most often, the crucial step forward is to redefine the problem in such a way that an already existing solution can be employed. The first question should always be directed towards the question itself: What kind of answer can you expect from asking a question in this particular way? What is missing? 
            - Making things more complicated than they are can be a way to avoid the underlying complexity of simple ideas. 
            - A clear structure allows us to explore the internal possibilities of something. Even the act of breaking with convention depends on it. 
            - The biggest threat to creativity and scientific progress is therefore the opposite: a lack of structure and restrictions. Without structure, we cannot differentiate, compare or experiment with ideas. Without restrictions, we would never be forced to make the decision on what is worth pursuing and what is not. Indifference is the worst environment for insight. 
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
            - If we accompany every step of our work with the question, “What is interesting about this?” and everything we read with the question, “What is so relevant about this that it is worth noting down?” we do not just choose information according to our interest. By elaborating on what we encounter, we also discover aspects we didn’t know anything about before and therefore develop our interests along the way. It would be quite sad if we did not change our interests during research. 
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
            - “It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copybooks and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.” (Whitehead) 
            - The most reliable predictor of our behaviour in the immediate future is – surprise, surprise – the intention to do it. If we decide to go to the gym now, the chance is that we really do go to the gym now. But this is, unfortunately, only true for the very immediate future. When it comes to the long run, researchers struggle to find any measurable connection between our intentions and our actual behaviour (Ji and Wood 2007; Neal et al. 2012). There is one exception, though: we most certainly act according to our intention if we happen to intend to do exactly what we used to do before. 
            - Learning, thinking and writing should not be about accumulating knowledge, but about becoming a different person with a different way of thinking. 
            - The more pressure we feel, the more we tend to stick to our old routines – even when these routines caused the problems and the stress in the first place. This is known as the tunnel effect (Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). But Mullainathan and Shafir, who examined this phenomenon thoroughly, also found a way out of it: Change is possible when the solution appears to be simple. 
    - [[Afterword]]
