- **Currently reading:** [[How to Take Smart Notes]]
- **Email:** edvardo.archer@gmail.com
- **Interest:** Building systems for families, Building systems for people
- **Michael Nieman:** @JeremieRykner
- **Profession:** [[Mental Health Counselor]] [[Practice Owner]] 
- -----------------------------------------
- Title:: How to Take Smart Notes: One Simple Technique to Boost Writing, Learning and Thinking – for Students, Academics and Nonfiction Book Writers
- Authors:: Ahrens, Sönke
- **Highlights and Notes**
    - ## 8 Let the Work Carry You Forward
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]] The [[curse of gifting and talent at a young age]]. It actually makes you more prone to mindsets that set you up for failure more than push you forward. [[Q: How do you help a gifted child grow and not set them up for failure?]]
        - Ironically, it is therefore often the highly ^^gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck.^^ Having been praised for what they are(talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing
            - **Highlight** page: 53 
            - Feedback loops are not only crucial for the dynamics of motivation, but also the key element to any learning process. Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, or in the more general terms of psychologist Carol Dweck, to grow. Dweck shows convincingly that the most reliable predictor for long-term success is having a “growth mindset.” To actively seek and welcome feedback, be it positive or negative, is one of the most important factors for success (and happiness) in the long run. Conversely, nothing is a bigger hindrance to personal growth than having a “fixed mindset.” Those who fear and avoid feedback because it might damage their cherished positive self-image might feel better in the short term, but will quickly fall behind in actual performance (Dweck 2006; 2013). Ironically, it is therefore often the highly gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck. Having been praised for what they are (talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing themselves to new challenges and the possibility of learning from failure. Embracing a growth mindset means to get pleasure out of changing for the better (which is mostly inwardly rewarding) instead of getting pleasure in being praised (which is outwardly rewarding). The orientation towards the latter makes one stick to safe, proven areas. The orientation towards the first draws the attention to the areas most in need of improvement. To seek as many opportunities to learn as possible is the most reliable long-term growth strategy. And if growth and success are not reasons enough, then maybe the fact that the fear of failure has the ugliest name of all phobias: Kakorrhaphiophobia. [*](((AR7OaXAvj)))
        - Kakorrhaphiophobia- the fear of failure #[[Literature Notes- EA]] #[[fear of failure]] 
        - And if growth and success are not reasons enough, then maybe the fact that the fear of failure has the ugliest name of all phobias: ^^Kakorrhaphiophobia.^^
            - **Highlight** page: 53 
            - Feedback loops are not only crucial for the dynamics of motivation, but also the key element to any learning process. Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, or in the more general terms of psychologist Carol Dweck, to grow. Dweck shows convincingly that the most reliable predictor for long-term success is having a “growth mindset.” To actively seek and welcome feedback, be it positive or negative, is one of the most important factors for success (and happiness) in the long run. Conversely, nothing is a bigger hindrance to personal growth than having a “fixed mindset.” Those who fear and avoid feedback because it might damage their cherished positive self-image might feel better in the short term, but will quickly fall behind in actual performance (Dweck 2006; 2013). Ironically, it is therefore often the highly gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck. Having been praised for what they are (talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing themselves to new challenges and the possibility of learning from failure. Embracing a growth mindset means to get pleasure out of changing for the better (which is mostly inwardly rewarding) instead of getting pleasure in being praised (which is outwardly rewarding). The orientation towards the latter makes one stick to safe, proven areas. The orientation towards the first draws the attention to the areas most in need of improvement. To seek as many opportunities to learn as possible is the most reliable long-term growth strategy. And if growth and success are not reasons enough, then maybe the fact that the fear of failure has the ugliest name of all phobias: Kakorrhaphiophobia. [*](((AR7OaXAvj)))
    - ## 9.5 Get Closure
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]] The mind is unreliable. Understanding how it tricks us can help us better navigate its failures. [[understanding your mind]][[how to best utilize your brain]]
        - ^^Zeigarnik effect^^: Open tasks tend to occupy our short- term memory– until they are done.
            - **Highlight** page: 70 
            - Zeigarnik successfully reproduced what is now known as the Zeigarnik effect: Open tasks tend to occupy our short-term memory–until they are done. That is why we get so easily distracted by thoughts of unfinished tasks, regardless of their importance. But thanks to Zeigarnik’s follow-up research, we also know that we don’t actually have to finish tasks to convince our brains to stop thinking about them. All we have to do is to write them down in a way that convinces us that it will be taken care of. That’s right: The brain doesn't distinguish between an actual finished task and one that is postponed by taking a note. By writing something down, we literally get it out of our heads. This is why David Allen’s “Getting things done” system works: The secret to have a “mind like water” is to get all the little stuff out of our short-term memory. And as we can’t take care of everything once and for all right now, the only way to do that is to have a reliable external system in place where we can keep all our nagging thoughts about the many things that need to be done and trust that they will not be lost. [*](((E4Y2AJaeT)))
    - ## 9.6 Reduce the Number of Decisions
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]] 
            - [[Q: Learn more about ego depletion]]
            - You have to cheat in order to work against ego depletion. Look up more information on how to do this by reviewing the [[Atomic Habits]] Book.
        - One of the most interesting findings of the research on ^^ego depletion^^ is the broad variety of things that can have a depleting effect.“Our results suggest that a broad assortment of actions make use of the same resource. Acts of self- control, responsible decision making, and active choice seem to interfere with other such acts that follow soon after. The implication is that some vital resource of the self becomes depleted by such acts of volition. To be sure, we assume that this resource is commonly replenished, although the factors that might hasten or delay the replenishment remain unknown, along with the precise nature of this resource.”(Baumeister et al., 1998, 1263f)
            - **Highlight** page: 72 
            - One of the most interesting findings of the research on ego depletion is the broad variety of things that can have a depleting effect. [*](((kKau7CeqI)))
            - “Our results suggest that a broad assortment of actions make use of the same resource. Acts of self-control, responsible decision making, and active choice seem to interfere with other such acts that follow soon after. The implication is that some vital resource of the self becomes depleted by such acts of volition. To be sure, we assume that this resource is commonly replenished, although the factors that might hasten or delay the replenishment remain unknown, along with the precise nature of this resource.” ([[Baumeister et al., 1998]], 1263f) [*](((4I1SMqMnF)))
            - The smartest way to deal with this kind of limitation is to cheat. Instead of forcing ourselves to do something we don’t feel like doing, we need to find a way to make us feel like doing what moves our project further along. Doing the work that need to be done without having to apply too much willpower requires a technique, a ruse. [*](((Gm7E9iVxd)))
    - ## 10.5 Learn by Reading
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]]
            - Elaboration- this is pretty crucial to the entire idea of taking smart notes. It clearly is exactly. how I want to read and understand as I go. 
        - ^^Elaboration means nothing other than really thinking about the meaning of what we read, how it could inform different questions and topics and how it could be combined with other knowledge.^^
            - **Highlight** page: 89 
            - It is not surprising, therefore, that the best-researched and most successful learning method is elaboration. It is very similar to what we do when we take smart notes and combine them with others, which is the opposite of mere re-viewing (Stein et al. 1984) Elaboration means nothing other than really thinking about the meaning of what we read, how it could inform different questions and topics and how it could be combined with other knowledge. In fact, “Writing for Learning” is the name of an “elaboration method” (Gunel, Hand, and Prain 2007). But there is a caveat. Even though elaboration works verifiably well for deep understanding, it might not be the best choice if you just want to learn isolated encyclopaedic facts (Rivard 1994). But as long as you are not striving for a career as a quiz show candidate, why would you want that, anyway? The slip-box takes care of storing facts and information. Thinking and understanding is what it can’t take off your shoulders, which is why it makes sense to focus on this part of the work. That it facilitates learning as well is a nice side effect. Luhmann almost never read a text twice (Hagen 1997) and was still regarded as an impressive conversation partner who seemed to have all information ready to hand.[ 30] [*](((kjNNcmaWn)))
    - ## 12 Develop Ideas
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]]
            - This has released me of so much pressure [[The Slip-box is **NOT**]]
        - we are much better off accepting as early as possible that an ^^overview of the slip- box is as impossible as having an overview of our own thinking while we are thinking.^^ As an extension of our own memory, the slip- box is the medium we think in, not something we think about
            - **Highlight** page: 108 
            - As the slip-box is not a book with just one topic, we don’t need to have an overview of it. On the contrary, we are much better off accepting as early as possible that an overview of the slip-box is as impossible as having an overview of our own thinking while we are thinking. As an extension of our own memory, the slip-box is the medium we think in, not something we think about. The note sequences are the clusters where order emerges from complexity. We extract information from different linear sources and mix it all up and shake it until new patterns emerge. Then, we form these patterns into new linear texts. [*](((wGGcv4ThN)))
    - ## 12.1 Develop Topics
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]]
            - Try to keep my tags relevant to the project I am working on or trying to build. Be thinking about, "what can I build with this bit of knowledge?"
        - Keywords should always be assigned with an eye towards the topics you are working on or interested in, never by looking at the note in isolation.
            - **Highlight** page: 111 
            - Keywords should always be assigned with an eye towards the topics you are working on or interested in, never by looking at the note in isolation. This is also why this process cannot be automated or delegated to a machine or program–it requires thinking. The Zettelkasten does make suggestions based on existing keywords and scans for keywords in the text you wrote. But it makes sense to see these suggestions more as a warning sign than an invitation to use them: these are the most obvious ideas and probably not the best ones. Good keywords are usually not already mentioned as words in the note. Assume I have the note “A sudden increase of ad-hoc theories is for Kuhn a sign that a normal-science phase might be in crisis (Kuhn 1967, 96).” A fitting keyword might be “paradigm change,” but that phrase is not in the note and therefore would not be suggested by the program. [*](((UhUikcAob)))
    - ## 12.5 Use the Slip - Box as a Creativity Machine
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]]
            - #Creativity is about the sight of something not about the accomplishment or finalization of something. z
        - When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty because they didn’t really do it, they just saw something.”(Steve Jobs) #quote
            - **Highlight** page: 121 
            - “Creativity is just connecting things. When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty because they didn’t really do it, they just saw something.” (Steve Jobs) [*](((ePVcU_TAX)))
    - ## 12.7 Facilitate Creativity through Restrictions
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]]
            - A question I need to bring back into rotation is, "Do I care about this?" [[Affirmations]]
        - ^^Indifference is the worst environment for insight.^^ #quote
            - **Highlight** page: 132 
            - The biggest threat to creativity and scientific progress is therefore the opposite: a lack of structure and restrictions. Without structure, we cannot differentiate, compare or experiment with ideas. Without restrictions, we would never be forced to make the decision on what is worth pursuing and what is not. Indifference is the worst environment for insight. And the slip-box is, above all, a tool for enforcing distinctions, decisions and making differences visible. One thing is for sure: the common idea that we should liberate ourselves from any restrictions and “open ourselves up” to be more creative is very misleading indeed (Dean 2013, 201). [*](((cEY7Tb21M)))
    - ## 14 Make It a Habit
        - #[[Literature Notes- EA]]
            - Thoughts to contribute to [[progressing to the next level]] [[becoming more efficient]]
        - Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.”(Whitehead)[ 43] #quote
            - **Highlight** page: 145 
            - “It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copybooks and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.” (Whitehead)  [*](((A__OvFWYO)))
        - Learning, thinking and writing should not be about accumulating knowledge, but about becoming a different person with a different way of thinking.
            - **Highlight** page: 150 
            - 
        - The slip- box is as simple as it gets. Read with a pen in your hand, take smart notes and make connections between them.
            - **Highlight** page: 152 
            - 
- **Community Thoughts**
    - The difference between a literature note and a permanent note is that one references a specific point in time, while a permanent note is the dialogue about that moment
    - The literature note has a one-to-one relationship with the material. A permanent note has a one-to-many relationship and expands beyond the boundaries of the material. Both of them form the strongest relationships of their type. 
- To Read:
    - Here is a brief [[Tutorial]] of how to use Anki-style spaced repetition using the Roam Toolkit browser extension (chrome/firefox) ... (this tutorial written by [[Matt Brockwell/MJB]] on [[November 29th, 2020]]) [*](((ia8DwP1hP)))
- Session 4 Notes
    - "Reflect on the work and timeline- has it been easy/hard to get through the phases so far? "
        - It has been a bit overwhelming to get through literature notes at this point. I have developed some permanent notes but it doesn’t feel completely natural. I am also feeling a bit insecure about the way I can tie together the permanent note into a zettel. I have no idea how that will serve. I am also really concerned about the consistency of the use of my tags across different books and articles. i.e. for one article I create a set of tags and then for another I create a new set of tags that are not necessarily connected or the same as the previous article. 
            - 
    - I feels like my permanent notes are enough to stand on by themselves. How do I connect it and recreate a new thought from those sollid thoughts? 
        - "What is holding you back from creating zettels?"
    - 
