- Feel free not to tag your name here, so questions will be anonymous
    - ## #Help [[Catherine Rickwood]] Roam Learner - Hi. I'm very new to Roam and excited about the potential. I've spent hours, days and weeks reviewing YouTube clips, reading various blogs, asked questions in the Slack channel, and am part way through Nat Eliason's course. And still I'm feeling stuck on how to move forward with creating a Zettelkasten structure and system that incorporates the disparate pieces of knowledge and information that's freely and generously been made available that makes sense and is reasonably robust. i.e. minimises creation of disconnected pages and pieces of information, thoughts, ideas or insights. Just wondering if anyone would be willing to jump on a zoom call for an hour to shine some light in the fog so that I can see again. :) Foolishly missed the opportunity to have a session with [[Beau Haan]] as considered myself too early in my journey. Am hoping there's someone willing to give their time. Thanks in advance.
        - P.S. Timezone is AEDT - Sydney, Australia. :)
    - #Help [[Denise Todd]] How do I get into [[November 15th, 2020]] 's live meeting, and at what time?  I see mention of an email but I'm not getting any emails. 
    - #Help  Novice question - Hi, I'm completely new to Roam, feeling overwhelmed and lost for the moment, would someone recommend resources to start with? I don't even know if I'm writing this in the right place, sorry if not! Thank you in advance!
    - #Reply-from [[Alex Shchedrin]] #@ [[StephanC]] - just sent you an email. Hope I can help.
        - Thanks a lot, your help is much appreciated !
    - Also, #Announcement, if you feel overwhelmed and lost, I am making some time over the next 2 weeks to be available to help. [Book a meeting here](https://calendar.x.ai/ashchedrin/rbc-help)  
- Query 1: 
    - Those who have missed Session 1 on 1st Nov, can we have recorded session for that? so that registered participant can have sync with for next Session 2.
        - #Reply [[Kaitlyn Dennis]] [The link to the full Zoom call](https://us02web.zoom.us/rec/play/zYfGrF-AHTDstjL-KcNgFdoYNFNJjedhpNEiRO6vE0Bsqfsn8RhhfmW1hwxRWbvdPcoZ7CodDAvKmXCI.kqj_pJiskYQhSKCY?continueMode=true) is included in the email [[Matt McKinlay]] sent on Nov. 4. 
- #Help [[Antonette Laderas]] Since the time I discovered [[Roam Research]], I also came across with [[Hypothes.is]] and [[Zotero]] because of this amazing #roamcult community. However, my main issue is that, in terms of academic journals, I have low comprehension. I tend to highlight everything because I always think that I can use it on my research. This is hard for me specially when science and engineering stuffs are the topics. Struggling on this one while starting my thesis this semester. Please someone help me.
    - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] it's great you have all your highlights! Are you systematically turning your highlights into literature notes?
- #Help "Should I strive to include the 5w1h of journalism (Who, What, When, Where, Why and How) in each zettel in the Roam?"
    - "Example 1: In his 2017 book, [[How to Take Smart Notes]], Sonke Ahrens describes a note-taking system to foster your ability to reflect, think and produce writing. The method is based on [[Niklas Luhmann]]'s [[Zettelkasten]]. It works through notes that distill a single idea, written in a simple, concise form, with your own words. As you write this note, you should reflect on related ideas in other notes and make reference to that. In this senses you create a network of ideas, with a structure constructed from bottom up. In this way, you create a dialog with the system, that will surface new ideas and possibilities. It will also facilitate your writing, as the notes can be easily arranged as a framework of a text. #zettel"
    - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] I would say if 5w1h is a framework that makes you feel each zettel is complete, go for it! there are no hard rules in regards to how zettels are created as far as I understand other than that they be in your own words and phrased in such a way to connect with your other notes.
- "Furthermore, I am also not sure how to deal with dependency on other notes. I know that each note should be self-evident and be comprehensible outside it's links, but how much so?"
    - "Example 1: In his 2017 book, [[How to Take Smart Notes]], Sonke Ahrens describes a note-taking system to foster your ability to reflect, think and produce writing. The method is based on [[Niklas Luhmann]]'s [[Zettelkasten]]. ~~It works through notes that distill a single idea, written in a simple, concise form, with your own words. As you write this note, you should reflect on related ideas in other notes and make reference to that. In this senses you create a network of ideas, with a structure constructed from bottom up. In this way, you create a dialog with the system, that will surface new ideas and possibilities. It will also facilitate your writing, as the notes can be easily arranged as a framework of a text.~~ #zettel"
    - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] Could you block reference some specific examples of notes or zettels you've created from the book that have the kind of dependencies you speak of to make your question a bit more concrete?
- Hello, Julie F here.  Logging in today, Nov 7, I keep getting this message and the orange dot, so not syching.  Any suggestions?? - Have tried logging off and logging back in a few times
    - Could not synchronize the last 100 changes to Roam servers.
    - If this persists, please consider copy pasting your recent changes into new Roam window.
    - You can check the current sync status on the sync dot next to the search box
    - #Reply-from [[Alex Shchedrin]] #@ [[Julie F]] with a lot of people typing, I found that remote changes sometimes do not have time to sync. As long as sync status shows "0 pending **local** changes", you should be ok to force-refresh Roam (CMD+R on a Mac or CTRL+R on Windows). This will load full database again (including all previously pending remote changes). 
Just to be safe, I usually do a quick export to JSON of the page that I was editing. 
    - Thanks so much, [[Alex Shchedrin]]  I haven't used JSON, but just researched it, sounds like it's an efficient way to copy, save, transfer into.
    - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] I usually wait it out - it typically resolves on its own. If it does get stuck, then you can take the steps Alex suggests.
-  [[Julie F]]  again.  #Help  
    - Do I want to be writing all this in MY Roam pages???  (That I am doing here on my Julie F page)  Don't I want to be making/connecting other notes in all this writing?  Like making in-line reference??  I am confused about this - ???
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] yes - take all your notes in [[Julie F]] and use block references  to refer to text in the book. as Bardia demonstrated in week 3, replacing block references text with its alias allows you to edit the text without disturbing the original source text.
    - [[David Lin]] #Help
        - From France, English is not my native language. I feel overwhelmed by this book club, I feel like i've missed the train. I did schedule both meeting with Sonke but never got the link to join the zoom. Are the zoom sessions recorded ? It might help me. I am a true beginner.
- #Help: the second session recording requires a passcode. Could anyone indicate what is the passcode? Thanks! [[November 16th, 2020]] [[November 17th, 2020]]  
    - 
    - #Reply-from [[Matt McKinlay]] 
        - I have uploaded it here to Youtube- ""{{[[youtube]]: https://youtu.be/K5mac0VtB2M}}""
            - Thank you!
        - 
            - many thanks! 
- I haven't been able to join the live sessions, but I've been really looking to see how folks implement Literature Notes and Permanent Notes in Roam. Are there any good recordings of this? Thank you! 
    - For example if I read an article that makes 10 great, related points. Does this become 10 Literature notes? 10 Permanent notes? I find my literature notes start to become permanent notes because I can't help but make associations. Is this following the method corrctly? 
        - [[Nikki Huang]] I'm having similar issues with literature notes becoming hard to distinguish from permanent notes (or even fleeting notes from literature notes). Sometimes making a higher-level note feels really redundant or even counterproductive, because the essence of what I wanted to capture or retain was already there in the lower-level note. By forcing myself to say things in a different way to move from a fleeting to a literature note, or from a literature note to a permanent one, I actually lose some of what was important. Does anyone else have this issue? Perhaps it's something we can discuss in our [[Live Session 5]]
            - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] I have a similar thing going on as well. The only way I really “resolved” it was to ensure my literature notes was a rewording of what the author said and my permanent note being a step removed from the source material contextualized into my interests.  That said, I often felt my permanent note was saying practically the same thing as my literature note but this was only maybe 5-10% of the time
                - #quote If your thoughts are already sorted and you have the time, you can skip this step [fleeting notes] and write your idea directly down as a proper, permanent note for your slip-box. [*](((pZ1dkTn5N)))
    - 
-  
- [[Nikki Huang]] #Help     I copied some block references from Sonke's book into my personal page. After I was done with making notes from them, I deleted them. However, when I checked my page a few days later, some of the deleted blocks were reappearing. This makes the whole page and process kind of messy. Any fixes? [[November 28th, 2020]]
    - {{[[TODO]]}} #support deleted blocks keep reappearing
        - IssueType:: #annoyance
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] I had this happen to be two days in a row. it was annoying indeed!  I discovered if I selected 10 blocks in a row and deleted them, they would come back later.  my #workaround was to just delete each block one at a time - ask me in a few days if the blocks come back!
- [[Nikki Huang]] #Help After attending a coaching session with [[Beau Haan]], I've got a new page set up: [[Nikki Huang/Zettels]]. So should I cut and paste all the existing fleeting and literature notes from my original personal page over to this new page for the process of creating Zettels out of them? [[November 28th, 2020]]
    - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] Whichever way is going to work best for you. I personally like having the `[[Name/Spaced]]` page just so I have a clean area to work from.
        - You can always move the contents from that page to your original page afterwards ;)
        - Thanks Beau!
- [[Antonette Laderas]]#Help     
    - Is there anyone here knows how to handle undergrad thesis with groupmates? I mean, for me, it's easier to work solo because of the whole context of thesis. First time to work with someone on a research project. Please help me. Any tips on how will I approach this as a leader of our thesis group?
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] I do not have any personal experience doing this (but I soon might be :)  Perhaps you can elaborate on what your current proposal is and the concerns you have about doing it this way with the group? I think it will be a lot easier to start with your ideas.
        - #Reply-from [[Catherine Rickwood]] I haven't supervised undergrad thesis group assignments, however, I have supervised many group assignments at a Masters level. 
            - Step 1: Create a team statement. Not some unachievable, unrealistic, world-is-perfect motherhood statement, but something you can all realistically agree to from start to finish. Ask team members to think about a group they loved working in and why. What was it that made it great and they'd like to replicate. Then, ask team members to think about a horrible team experience. What didn't they like and why. Based on this brainstorming exercise, create a statement that you're all happy with. It shouldn't be more than one or two sentences. Three tops. Be super-realistic. Allow for people working in different timezones, with varying cultural backgrounds, work styles, and work or family commitments. This statement becomes your touchstone when it all feels like it's falling apart. Return to the statement and be honest with yourself and each other about what you're no longer doing and committed to at the start. 
            - Step 2: Determine roles and responsibilities based on individual strengths & weaknesses.
            - Importantly, meet regularly and face-to-face (whether virtually or in-person). Putting everything into a shared tool, whatever it is, isn't enough.
            - Feel free to get in touch if this was useful and you'd like more ideas.
-   a
