- Twitter:: [@dizzyfingers42](https://twitter.com/dizzyfingers42)
- Profession:: Music Theorist
- Book Club 1 member? (y/n):: y
- Favourite books:: 
    - [[Frank Herbert]]: [[Dune]] 
    - [[Douglas Adams]]: [[Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy]] 
    - [[Isaac Asimov]]: [[Foundation]] Series
- Conversations:
    - "#Chat [[Matt Brockwell/MJB]] --> [[@[[Jenn Harding]]]] the above quote makes me really interested in reading [[Cal Newport]]! ... very interested in ritual, routine, and [[decision fatigue]] right now - I'm really finding that being mindful of all these concepts is helping me juggle all the complicated aspects of my workday, especially during the Covid lockdown!"
        - #[[Reply-from]][[Jenn Harding]] I've really been enjoying [[Cal Newport]]'s work and have found it really valuable. Having rituals and routines has really helped to delineate what parts of the day are for work and which are for not-work. I've found that when those lines are blurred, the fatigue (whether decision fatigue or otherwise) sets in much sooner.
- How to Take Smart Notes::
    - Fleeting Notes::
        - [[Introduction]]
            - ^^Writing is not what follows research, learning or studying, it is the medium of all this work.^^ And maybe that is the reason why we rarely think about this writing, the everyday writing, the note-taking and draft-making. Like breathing, it is vital to what we do, but ^^because we do it constantly, it escapes our attention^^...any improvement in the way we organise the everyday writing, how we take notes of what we encounter and what we do with them, will make all the difference for the moment we do face the blank page/ screen–or rather not, as ^^those who take smart notes will never have the problem of a blank screen again.^^ [*](((NOUeE9wbB)))
                - Writing begins long before I open a new document. Writing involves all of the thinking, reading, data collecting, and conversations that take place before I sit down to write a draft. Taking notes in a smart way—i.e., actually __written__ into a system that is navigable and coherent—allows me to have done the bulk of the writing even before I have to start drafting a document.
            - Here is another reason that note-taking flies mostly under the radar: ^^We don’t experience any immediate negative feedback if we do it badly. ^^But without an immediate experience of failure, there is also not much demand for help. And the publishing market working how it works, there is not much help in supply for this lack of demand either. It is the panic in front of the blank screen that brings students and academic writers to turn to the bookshelves full of self-help books on writing, a market publishers meet in droves by focusing on how to deal with this horse-has-already-left-the-barn situation. If we take notes unsystematically, inefficiently or simply wrong, we might not even realise it until we are in the midst of a deadline panic and wonder why there always seem to be a few who get a lot of good writing done and still have time for a coffee every time we ask them. And even then, it is more likely that some form of rationalization will cloud the view of the actual reason, which is most likely the difference between good and bad note-taking. “Some people are just like that,” “writing has to be difficult,” “the struggle is part of the deal” are just a few of the mantras that keep too many from inquiring what exactly distinguishes successful writing strategies from less successful ones.  [*](((1NqxVWlvh)))
                - How did he manage to tell my life story like that?
            - Luckily, this is not the whole story. We know today that ^^self-control and self-discipline have much more to do with our environment than with ourselves^^ (cf. Thaler, 2015, ch. 2) – ^^and the environment can be changed^^...Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long-and short-term interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. ^^Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success.^^ This is where the organisation of writing and note-taking comes into play. [*](((tIetkYe5Q)))
                - [[Cal Newport]] agrees in his book [[Deep Work]]. He talks about how [[routine]]s and [[ritual]]s minimize the need for [[willpower]] and reduce the number of decisions that need to be made in any given day. This frees up brain space for more important work. Rituals surrounding deep work include location and the actions that come both immediately before and immediately after. Routines and rituals provide structure: a beginning, middle, and end to the activity.
        - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
            - ^^A good structure is something you can trust. It relieves you from the burden of remembering and keeping track of everything.^^ If you can trust the system, you can let go of the attempt to hold everything together in your head and you can start focusing on what is important...^^A good structure enables flow^^, the state in which you get so completely immersed in your work that you lose track of time and can just keep on going as the work becomes effortless (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). ^^Something like that does not happen by chance.^^ [*](((N9B8GYzJr)))
                - It is possible to engineer the [[flow]] state by creating an environment and system that both supports immersion and reduces friction. This reminds me of the concept of __mise en place__, or everything in its place (usually used in the culinary context). Things move smoothly and naturally all necessary components are in their proper place; I know where they are, I don't have to think about finding them, everything is ready to go. When reading and writing, __mise en place__ can be configuring my environment to support my task and minimize distraction, having a good supply of caffeine readily available, and using a note-taking system that I am comfortable with and that I can entrust my thoughts to.
            - Even the best tool will not improve your productivity considerably if you don’t change your daily routines the tool is embedded in...Routines require simple, repeatable tasks that can become automatic and fit together seamlessly (cf. Mata, Todd, and Lippke, 2010).^^ Only when all the related work becomes part of an overarching and interlocked process, where all bottlenecks are removed, can significant change take place.^^ [*](((ez0DqkFlC)))
                - Changing my writing and note-taking habits requires new [[routine]]s and [[ritual]]s, not just a shiny new tool. The tool helps to remove friction, but is only one part of a much larger shift. The goal is not to use the shiny tool for the tool's sake, but to make meaningful improvements to my writing. Establishing routines and rituals around my writing helps shift my mental state into “writing mode.” 
        - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
            - ^^Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have.^^ Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head.[*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))
                - Externalizing my learning also allows me to be my own student. As a teacher, I am used to critiquing, guiding, and helping students. Somehow, it is so much difficult to go through that process with my own thoughts. However, when I write things out, suddenly it becomes much easier to “teach” myself. What do I still not understand? What are the steps I need to take to understand it more? How would I walk a student through gaining a deep understanding of the topic? Externalizing the ideas removes the ego.
        - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
            - 
- Literature Notes::
- [[Book Club Live Session 1]]
    - [[Goals for Book Club]]
        - Personal goals: 
            - Solidify my understanding of the principles of smart note taking.
            - Hone my craft of both note-taking and prose-writing. 
            - Improve my system in my own personal Roam graph, and more effectively implement the techniques of Zettelkasten in Roam.
        - Group goals: Unfortunately, I will not be able to participate very much (I'll only be attending this week and the last week), so I don't really have anything to contribute to group goals.
- [[Book Prompts]]
    - ""While some career-oriented academics try to squeeze as many publications out of one idea as possible, Luhmann seemed to do the opposite. He constantly generated more ideas than he was able to write down. His texts read as if he is trying to squeeze as much insight and as many ideas as possible into one publication." p. 14"
- [[Writing Prompts]]
    - "What's going to change after reading this book?"
