- **Your name:** Jim Stanczak
- Email:: jimsta888@gmail.com
- Favourite books:: [[Essentialism]] [[Man's Search for Meaning]]
- Interests:: [[Early Stage Startups]] [[Finance]] [[Decision Making]]
- Profession:: Venture Advisor | Investor | Retired, but suck at it
- Twitter:: @jim_stanczak
- Location:: [[Boston]]
- Currently reading:: [[How to Take Smart Notes]] [[Range]] [[Thinking in Bets]]
- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- [[Book Club Live Session 1]]
    - [[Goals for Book Club]]
        - I am keen to improve my reading, note-taking, and writing by sharing ideas with a very impressive group
        - Better understand the process of creating [[Zettels]], and see the potential for refinement through working in cross-disciplinary teams
        - To get the chance to see the empirical results of working in diverse teams
            - I feel there is much to be gained, but it isn't as simple as most management books would lead you to believe. 
            - Already I can sense the lack of a common goal as a significant inhibitor, so I appreciate the additional attempts at structure.
        - I believe we have the opportunity to create a wonderful lattice we can all take back to our personal graphs, with maybe a dozen highly refined and rich [[Zettels]]
        -  
- [[Book Club Live Session 2]]
    - Reflection on first reading phase of the book  [[How to Take Smart Notes]]
        - What ideas resonate with you from the book
            - What is the gist of the book? 
                - There is no better way to solidify your learning, strengthen your arguments, and sharpen your thinking than writing. Writing forces you to lay out all aspects of a coherent argument and put them in order, whereas oftentimes in conversations you can gloss over weaknesses in your argument with a blasé, "you know what I mean" or the like. 
                - Unfortunately, the way we are taught to write is very ineffective, because it assumes you can determine a good argument before you even start researching. Good ideas and arguments take time to develop, and often don't survive first contact with the outside world (outside of your head). 
                - Therefore, the book provides a framework for you to get the most out of your reading. The most important aspect is developing [[Zettels]], or "Permanent Notes," which are major assertions __always__ written in your own words. The benefit of this process is writing in your own words forces you to really grapple with a concept and then distill it down to its essence. [[Zettels]] are then building blocks for your future writing, as you begin to see patterns emerging and links between them. 
                - Sonke provides a prescribed process that begins with [[Fleeting Notes]], then moves to [[Literature Notes]], before becoming Permanent Notes. I am not yet convinced this process is truly necessary in full, so I am looking forward to hearing from other people's impressions, especially those who have successfully implemented such a program.
        - Discuss the fleeting note phase
            - What does the concept of fleeting notes mean to you? 
                - A [[Fleeting Notes]] seems to be the first thought that might pop in your head while reading. Sonke feels highlighting or writing in margins is a waste of time, and fleeting notes should always be handwritten on a separate piece of paper. I really don't like that workflow, as it seems to introduce a good deal of friction. Reading on a Kindle, the highlighting feature is extraordinarily useful, and I think the ability to handwrite additional notes might be my preferred method of creating [[Fleeting Notes]]. I am doing this extensively in [[Range]] and will see how the results turn out.
            - Define a fleeting note in your own words. 
            - How did you take fleeting notes? Discuss your method.
            - What is the value of fleeting notes?  For this book, and for previous books you have read? 
                - This is the questions of the day! I have yet to really make use of them (previously just highlighting books), so this should be a tremendous learning experience.
    - Breakout Room 1
        - creating a dialogue with yourself - Beau
        - What is a fleeting note?
            - Any thought or reaction while reading
            - Stanley is also a highlighter, Beau suggests that is cool and you can essentially do some progressive summarization
        - What is not a fleeting note?
            - 
    - [[Graph Meditation]]
        - I am still overwhelmed scrolling through the graph
        - I have a fear of breaking other people's work
        - Discussion:
            - Matt - wanting to generate commentary on the blocks in the book
            - **Homework** - create Literature notes, and it is good practice to use block references to the book in the graph - save as text and alias is a sweet trick
                - You can pull single quotes out, Matt Brockwell for examples
                - ^^Delete highlights after creating the literature notes^^
    - **What did your group talk about?:**
    - 
    - 
- [[Book Club Live Session 3]]
    - Writing time:
        - "What struggles have you had implementing literature notes?"
            - I don't have a solid vision of what the result should "look like," so I am not exactly sure what I should be doing. I want to see how someone has actually created some output with the system (written a paper), so I have a better understanding of what to strive for.
        - "Describe any enlightening moments you had while taking literature notes."
            - As I reviewed my highlights to begin creating [[Literature Notes]], I realized I highlighted way more than I needed. I get the feeling I can make this process far more efficient and meaningful, while also saving space in my DB, by being much more judicious in my highlighting. Utilizing the Kindle feature that allows me to write my own thoughts along with a highlight appears to be a 2 for 1. 
    - Breakout Session 1 
        - [[Heath Raftery]] [[William Njau]] [[Wade Dominic]] [[Patricia Soto]] [[Bardia Pourvakil]]
            - We all have unique and uncertain definitions of literature notes, and it is a new concept to all of us.
            - With a question of how to create literature notes in your own words when English is not your first language led to a nice insight - have prompts and questions that will help you craft them. Such as, what does this remind me of? How does it make me feel?
    - 
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 1 Writing Session**"
            - "Define a literature note in your own words."
                - Translating a thought expressed in a book into your own words.
                - They do not need to include enough context to stand on their own
                    - But they have enough context so that you don't need to read the original text to make sense of them
            - "How do you take literature notes? Discuss your method."
                - I usually look through all the exports that have been imported through Readwise and try to make a new bullet in my own words for each of the ones that I find relevant.
                    - I then create a block reference to the original one below so that I can backtrack to the source
                - I always highlight the title of a chapter, which makes it easy to sort out my notes once they have been imported
            - "What struggles have you had implementing literature notes?"
                - Almost all of my notes turn into summarization
                - Sometimes a few highlights seem to build towards the same note, but I have a hard time consolidating them
                    - This happens especially when the same theme appears across different chapters
                        - By the time I see find a new fleeting note related to an earlier thought, I'm not sure where that earlier thought was, and I don't want to backtrack to find it
                - I have not been able to create a daily practice of processing my fleeting notes into literature notes
                    - Usually I go through in one go and process all the fleeting notes once I have finished reading a book
            - "Have you found value in taking literature notes already?"
                - They provide me an easy way to scan through the material of a book when I would like to refresh on the content
                - Putting things into my own words definitely helps me remember more
            - "Describe any enlightening moments you had while taking literature notes."
                - Often I realize that the same thoughts have come up multiple times
                    - It's helpful to consolidate all the different wording used by the author into one place, to distill the main idea behind them
                    - Not needing to worry about connecting literature notes while I am writing them helps me focus on just extracting the gist
        - "{{[[TODO]]}} ~~Section 4 Breakout rooms 2~~"
            - Acknowledge the challenges of changing behavior
                - "We have the best chance to change our behaviour over the long term if we start with a realistic idea about the difficulties of behavioural change (Dean 2013). And that is not so easy, because the more we are used to doing something in a particular way, the more in control we feel about it, even though we are less in control of it. (This is in part also due to the aforementioned mere-exposure error.)"
            - Doing something in the same way makes us feel in control, even when that is counter productive
                - "We have the best chance to change our behaviour over the long term if we start with a realistic idea about the difficulties of behavioural change (Dean 2013). And that is not so easy, because the more we are used to doing something in a particular way, the more in control we feel about it, even though we are less in control of it. (This is in part also due to the aforementioned mere-exposure error.)"
    - Block References Demo:
        -  [Matt B's writeup](https://roamresearch.com/#/app/roam-book-club-2/page/hJmF84Ceb)
        - Another process: copy/paste the entire block, and then left-click and "replace with text & alias"
            - This is a sample: [*](((yIlbxuFst)))
            - Shift+Ctrl+9 for advanced block search
        - Check Juan Caicedo's notes
        - I understand we first must acknowledge how challenging it is to change habits if we are going to be successful in that endeavor. Unfortunately, I am not clear what he is driving at about being "in control." [*](((x5hx3y9ay)))
        - 
- [[Book Club Live Session 4]]
    - Writing Exercise
        - "Reflect on the book.  What are you impressions? "
            - I have found the book to be quite useful and somewhat motivating. I appreciate how [[Sonke]] had laid out the information; beginning with how this strategy better aligned with how the human mind actually works. When I combine those concepts with some of the insights we generated in [[Books/Where Good Ideas Come From]] and [[Range]], it makes it much more clear why this system is effective. 
            - Moving on to the practical application, I would like to see a more updated version of the book available that acknowledges how the system can incorporate new technology. It seems the system could be streamlined a bit to take advantage of the increased capacity enabled through technology. I would also appreciate a few examples of how the output is generated, so I might envision creating my own body of writing.
        - "Reflect on literature notes- useful? Did they help you understand the book in a different way? "
            - Literature notes helped me realize that I have been highlight far too much of the books I read. Although I do think the process of reviewing my highlights, generating literature notes, and then getting rid of the extraneous highlights has helped me through a spaced repetition practice. Next up, is getting more confident inking my keyword and blocks in order to start generating useful atomic thoughts for writing.
    - Breakout Room 1
        - [[Mike Kramer]] [[Lindsey Johnston✨]] [[Alex Shchedrin]] [[Beverly Hall]]
            - Beverly has used DEVONThink & tinderbox prior to Roam
                - DEVONThink doesn't require as much input from the user, and the algorithm does surface some ideas
            - Shared Roam Tools for writing 
            - Alex is in Roam in everything except for tasks in Outlook
                - has noticed he has become a better reader (I completely agree)
            - Mike still in the struggle developing the Zettelkasten system
            - Concern: Both book in the club so far have some common flaws:
                - Editing was a bit lackluster
                - The connections were not always very well supported, and they lack unity
                - Beverly agrees - using Roam for appellate briefs and litigation
            - Alex - debunked the Russian space pencil story!
                - anecdotes are great, but they need to support the conclusion well
                -  Also reading [[Thinking in Bets]]
                - Maybe use sliders to gauge how "true" an assertions is
    - Group Discussion
        - How confident are you in what a Permanent Note is?
            - A remix of Literature Notes to develop a "world view"
            - aka "Evergreen Notes" & "Zettels"
    - Graph Meditation
        - Roam Portal
            - excellent tool to review what other members are up to
    - Creating out Zettels
        - Be sure to use the Zettels template
        - Always support you Zettel claim with support from Literature Notes or block refences from the book
        - Write you Zettels in your own page
        - The goal is not to link things together (just yet?)
        - ^^CREATE 10 ZETTELS THIS WEEK^^
        - 
- [[Book Club Live Session 5]]
    - **Section 1** [[Writing practice]]
        - "Reflect on your own reading and writing practice and habits with this book over the last month. "
            Sadly, I have really let my reading & writing slip after a strong start with this book. Completely my own fault as I let other projects and the US holiday take precedence, but alas, no permanent damage done.  I do feel with all I I have learned from the group thus far, I am a far more effective reader than at any previous point in time. My goal of concurrently completing and implementing the GTD framework should be a tremendous help in generating more creative output.
            Which does lead to another benefit of reading How to take Smart notes with the Roam Book Club, and that is becoming a more discerning consumer of other people's writing. I have eschewed several periodicals in favor of long-form writing, and I am becoming more judicious with my highlighting. 
    - **Section 2** Zettel writing session with [[Beau Haan]]
        - "Template - Apply children as text"
            - #[[Question 3]] (essentially create a Zettel with all the stuff written below)
                - #[[Question 2]] [Chapter 14. (Paragraph 6))](((4hIM0I_l_)))
                    - When you successfully develop the practice of creating notes and connecting them with previous thoughts and notes, you will never be able to return to your previous methods as you realize how inefficient they are
                    - (What is the author saying, in your own words, this is the "Literature Notes")
                    - (View it as a litmus test for your understanding)
                - #[[Question 1]] This is a new system to build up over time, and as you get used t it, you will always have the desire to take fleeting notes based on the information you are consuming, and connecting it to previous thoughts and notes.
                    - (Write what resonates with me after reading the above block, this is the "Fleeting Notes")
                    - I am trying to build a new habit in incremental steps
                    - The ultimate goal is to first have the urge to take notes as thoughts occur to you as you read and consume information
                    - The second step is wanting to connect those new ideas with existing ideas already present in your system
            - "Project Notes" - a place where you might have orphaned Literature Notes or unsubstantiated Zettels that are still a WIP
                - "To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes:"
                    - 1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two.
                    - 2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box.
                    - 3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished.


    - **Section 3** [[Break Out Rooms]]
        - {{[[POMO]]: 30}}
        - Explore the Zettels in the #Zettels    page, and discuss your own Zettel technique so far.  
            - Beware creating "Fortune Cookie Wisdom" - having untethered aphorisms, just thoughts that occur to you as you are reading & writing
            - Maybe this process enables us to look into counter arguments sooner (steel-man your arguments)
            - Literature Notes - defined by who you are writing for
                - so they are building blocks for your argument
                - anchored in ideas other people care about
            - Creating "white papers" probably aligns with my Zettel style
    - **Section 4** Graph Meditation
        - {{[[POMO]]: 20}}
        - Explore the graph individually for 8 minutes
        - [[Dharam Kapila]] to use [[Roam Portal]] to show us what's happened in the graph this week
            - 
    - **Section 5** [[Matt Brockwell]] to explore spaced repetition tools
        - 
    - **Section 6** What's next
        - Going for at least 10 Zettels
        - We can even start combining people's Zettels
        - A discussion about what to plan for next week as [[Sönke Ahrens]] joins us. 
- [[Book Club Live Session 6]] - **BONUS, ft. Sonke!**
    - Questions for us from [[Sönke Ahrens]]
        1. What have you learnt about note taking that I (Sönke) should know about?
        2. Are there any additions to the process described in the book?
        3. Discuss your impression of the range of possibilities and limitations of a Zettelkasten
        4. (what use cases does it work for? Are there any examples it doesn't work for?)
    - Questions from Sonke:
        - "What have you learnt about note taking that I (Sönke) should know about?"
            - The Zettelkasten method really is a healthy habit; it is the "eat your vegetables" of reading and learning. Unfortunately, it does take a lot of activation energy to get it going, even for those of us who are highly motivated. And as frustrating as it is, appealing with logic and facts doesn't have the impact it should. Therefore, I am really focusing on the gap - I say I want to write more and learn in public, but I am not doing that with a regular cadence. Now I need to help find those little steps that will create momentum and would love to hear other success stories. Does it make sense to play with social media, such as LinkedIn and Twitter? Should we eventually try a book club that focuses on bits of output rather than process? It may be an interesting follow-up article topic - sharing methods for how people improved their process by employing the Zettlekasten system.
        - "Are there any additions to the process described in the book?"
            - I think a discussion on how new technology can make this process more efficient would be extremely helpful. I find taking notes in my Kindle on an iPad are highly effective Fleeting notes, and utilizing the block refences of Roam essentially create the reference notes concurrently. 
        - "Discuss your impression of the range of possibilities and limitations of a Zettelkasten?"(what use cases does it work for? Are there any examples it doesn't work for?)
            - The system is not designed for books that are prescriptive in nature and tend to describe procedures or steps. I am currently reading Getting Things Done, and many aspects of that book are not worth the time and effort to rewrite in my own words. That said, I do see myself creating Zettels for the underlying logic, so the reasoning resonates with me on a personal level.    
    - Interview with Sonke:
        - He does only one graph and still does his personal journaling with pen and paper
        - When reading - start with "What is the gist here?"
            - don't necessarily need to go through all three steps, especially when you already have a good understanding of the topic
            - you can start wherever you are comfortable, as close to writing a permanent note
            - very dense technical papers are often the opposite - you may need to immerse yourself in the argument quite a bit before writing
            - beginners often make too many notes to start
        - Using Roam - not much difference in the initial process, but it is much easier to get into ideas again
            - There is a risk of too many connections and possibilities instead of focusing on the writing
            - Use pages as representations of note sequences, and leverage block refences to help get back into your own argument
        - Major struggles
            - people struggle with the balance of bottom up and top down hierarchy (Sonke may have overemphasized the bottoms up)
            - people often focus too much on what they are doing wrong, and need to be more kind to themselves using an imperfect system
            - Look more to the structure of your output for feedback, rather than focusing on every step of the process
        - Sonke question: Worried about the future - do you have the correct structure and backlinks in order to make use of your notes?
            - Have you learned anything you wish you would have known right from the start?
                - It would be great to see various examples of other people's Zettels before starting on your own. Especially when trying to get to having a conversation with yourself
                - Setting vs having a structure emerge: 
- [[Book Club Live Session 7]]
    - "Pick from the prompts below and write in your own page for 25 minutes."
        - "The book promotes a bottom up approach to note taking, which we have used in Book Club. Reflect on this. How did this feel? "
    - "You start a conversation with a stranger in the street. They ask you what is a Zettelkasten. What do you say? "
        - Zettelkasten is a note-taking strategy that helps you get the most mileage out of your reading by treating your thoughts generated by the material as dynamic building blocks rather than static facts to be filed. It is an iterative process that starts with quickly capturing "fleeting notes" as you read, along with the reference that generated that thought. The process can be highly personalized, so long as it has as little friction as possible so you can effectively capture these important thoughts and facts. The second pass requires you to frame the author's assertion or argument in your own words to ensure you have a solid understanding, and this process generates "Literature Notes." From there, you combine Literature notes and distill the few major points of the material into "Permanent Notes" which become essential building blocks for your second brain, referred to in the system as a "slip box." New notes added to your slip box will tend to coalesce with existing notes over time, generating new insights and topics of interest you may want to write about. In my limited experience, the system acts as a liquid network of ideas, helping you make non-obvious connections and often finding useful analogies across topics.
    - "Reflect on your reading and writing habit through Book Club. Did the emphasis and exploration of Sonke's book change your reading and writing habits?"
        - It has changed my aspirations, but not yet my entire process. I have to do a much better job of reviewing some of my recent notes and attempting to draft some output, no matter how small and inconsequential. I assume I still have a lot to learn about generating output that will feed back into my note-taking process. 
Some of the more immediate impacts have been my reduced highlighting while reading, as I am more focused on how important particular facts might be, and will they actually be helpful in the future. Also, generating a few Literature Notes has forced my to review some highlights and deepen my understanding as I try and write them in my own words.
    - "What's your favourite blocks (or quotes) from the book?"
        - "#quote The simplicity of the structure allows complexity to build up where we want it: on the content level.[*](((vhg4vhrk2)))"
    - Breakout session 1
        - How might this process be different, as our motivation was more about leaving artifacts for people to onboard on Roam later?
        - What is Zettelkasten (refer to question 1)?
            - Julie F. - creating your own "library of thoughts" 
            - A reliable method to combine ideas and further develop thoughts
                - really does help create analogies 
            - What are the downsides of this system, and how might it create some blind spots?
                - What is the value of questioning my own thoughts?
                - The quality of the input is essential! Garbage in, garbage out
            - It must be simple, and the external scaffolding is imperative
- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- [[Introduction]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] This strategy is all about developing a habit to remove future friction. Routinely curating and connecting your notes will help make the writing process an organic and natural progression
        - #quote Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time.[*](((tIetkYe5Q)))
- [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] The system allows you to develop your own [[Slow Hunch]]. Ideas are captured along with their reference, and turned into your own thoughts, thereby freeing your mind and encouraging creativity.
        - #quote A good, structured workflow puts us back in charge and increases our freedom to do the right thing at the right time.[*](((lz_jy3Uyg)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]] The "thinking" part of the process comes when you rewrite the notes and create relevant links. But connecting disparate information is where humans still have an advantage, so allow the systems to handle the rote responsibility of keeping all these little factoids at hand.
        - #quote The simplicity of the structure allows complexity to build up where we want it: on the content level.[*](((vhg4vhrk2)))
- [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] The main objective of this entire process is to connect ideas in your own unique way, and then write them in your own words. It will make your arguments far more cohesive and complete
        - #quote Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have.[*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]]I am still having a difficult time envisioning the leap from note-taking to creation
        - #quote Develop your topics, questions and research projects bottom up from within the system. See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. Even if you don’t have anything in your slip-box yet, you never start from scratch–you already have ideas on your mind to be tested, opinions to be challenged and questions to be answered.[*](((erCjnBgLf)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]] I do agree this system provides a great deal of value by helping you capture the "incidental learning" that happens during research. 
        - #quote Spending the little extra time to add them to your system will make all the difference, because the accidental encounters make up the majority of what we learn.[*](((EegQ1h74c)))
- [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] Maybe one of the least important chapters given the myriad of platform choices and individual workflows. It boils down to a few key items, and they might eventually be **bundled**(I will likely link this in my own DB on a discussion of "the only way to make money is to bundle or unbundle"):
        1. Idea Capture - starting to use my daily notes which show promise, but still want to capture atomic ideas from podcasts or other times when I am on-the-go
        2. Reference System - I like the Roam Brain blogpost that treats all of your highlights in Roam as your reference system. Feels fair and easy.
        3. The Slip-Box - This seems like the biggest lift, and where I am still uncertain. Creating and organizing your #zettels
        4. The editor - where ever you like to write. Playing with writing in Roam and then transferring to Word or Docs with Ryan Guills app
- [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
    - Like most things in life, it is important to understand how and why it works, so you can fully appreciate and engage in the process
        - No need for any additional notes or thoughts from this short section
- [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
- [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] Approaching writing solely as a task will diminish the process and become a missed opportunity for actual learning
        - #quote Students should not only learn to write papers, but also learn facts, be able to discuss their ideas in seminars and listen carefully to lectures. [*](((rfxlhKub4)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]] If you take the approach you will write about everything you are learning, you will automatically become a more critical reader and thinking, and likely be more discerning on the information you consume.
        - #quote Even if you decide never to write a single line of a manuscript, you will improve your reading, thinking and other intellectual skills just by doing everything as if nothing counts other than writing. [*](((9LdD6VzxA)))
- [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] Developing a good notetaking system requires systems thinking - don't get lost in the minutia of a particular passage or topic, always keep an eye on how it contributes to your entire body of knowledge.
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] The more you learn and collect, the more beneficial your notes should become, the more ideas can mingle and give birth to new ones–and the easier it should be to write an intelligent text with less effort. [*](((wIYnbucZC)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]] Proper notetaking has a network effect -  additional notes will strengthen arguments and clarify thinking. Poor notetaking has the opposite effect.
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] In contrast to the fleeting notes, every permanent note for the slip-box is elaborated enough to have the potential to become part of or inspire a final written piece, but that can not be decided on up front as their relevance depends on future thinking and developments. The notes are no longer reminders of thoughts or ideas, but contain the actual thought or idea in written form. This is a crucial difference. [*](((UZ4XCHfSA)))
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] A typical mistake is made by many diligent students who are adhering to the advice to keep a scientific journal.  [*](((7GWVsCHA5)))
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] The second typical mistake is to collect notes only related to specific projects.  [*](((HlsQj7ZDO)))
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] The third typical mistake is, of course, to treat all notes as fleeting ones.  [*](((V8bEn02_W)))
    - #[[Personal Notes]] Ch 6 may be the most impactful for me - I have decades of now useless "scientific journals" and gigabytes of project notes and now feel drowning in information and struggle to produce results
- [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] All research begins with a question. Questions spring forth when novel information doesn't neatly fit in our current narrative, so it is therefore impossible to start with an entirely clean slate.
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] Every intellectual endeavour starts from an already existing preconception, which then can be transformed during further inquires and can serve as a starting point for following endeavours. [*](((kvk3dCa8w)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]] Our memory is fallible and fraught with biases, so creating immutable records of our thoughts is invaluable to look at them more critical and observe how they evolve over time.
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] By focusing on what is interesting and keeping written track of your own intellectual development, topics, questions and arguments will emerge from the material without force. [*](((2U8Id9Bu8)))
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] If you haven’t written along the way, the brain is indeed the only place to turn to. On its own, it is not such a great choice: it is neither objective nor reliable–two quite important aspects in academic or nonfiction writing. [*](((ww64gf_vE)))
- [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
    - #[[Literature Notes]] Improvement of any type requires deliberate practice which is built upon immediate and concrete feedback. Creating notes in our own words provides that essential feedback for learning
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] Reading with a pen in the hand, for example, forces, us to think about what we read and check upon our understanding. It is the simplest test: We tend to think we understand what we read–until we try to rewrite it in our own words. By doing this, we not only get a better sense of our ability to understand, but also increase our ability to clearly and concisely express our understanding–which in return helps to grasp ideas more quickly. [*](((XNIhRfrZU)))
    - #[[Literature Notes]] The feedback from creating permanent notes and sharing our thinking through writing becomes its own reward, generating a virtuous circle
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] A good workflow can easily turn into a virtuous circle, where the positive experience motivates us to take on the next task with ease, which helps us to get better at what we are doing, which in return makes it more likely for us to enjoy the work, and so on. [*](((NcwnhsymJ)))
        - #[[Fleeting Notes]] Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. [*](((AR7OaXAvj)))
- [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
- [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
- [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
- [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
- [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]
- [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
- [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
- [[Afterword]]
- ### Highlights::
    - 6  Simplicity Is Paramount ([Location 742](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=742))
        - 
        - **We tend to think that big transformations have to start with an equally big idea. But more often than not, it is the simplicity of an idea that makes it so powerful** #[[Slow Hunch]] (and often overlooked in the beginning). ([Location 744](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=744))
        - ^^If writing is the medium of research and studying nothing else than research, then there is no reason not to work as if nothing else counts than writing.^^ ([Location 719](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=719))
        - McLean understood better than others that it is not the perspective of the ship-owners that counts, but the purpose of the whole trade: to bring goods from the producer to the final destination. Only after aligning every single part of the delivery chain, from packaging to delivery, from the design of the ships to the design of the harbours, was the full potential of the container unleashed. ([Location 771](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=771))
            - Benefits of an outsider perspective
            - When the advantages became obvious, second-order effects came into play and went into a self-reinforcing positive feedback loop. The more harbours were able to handle containers, the more container ships were needed to be built, which made shipping cheaper, which increased the range of goods worth shipping, which created more traffic, which made bigger container ships economical, which created more demand for infrastructure and so on. It wasn’t just another way of shipping goods. It was a whole new way of doing business. ([Location 774](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=774))
        - ^^In the old system, the question is: Under which topic do I store this note? In the new system, the question is: In which context will I want to stumble upon it again? ^^([Location 787](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=787))
            - If you sort by topic, you are faced with the dilemma of either adding more and more notes to one topic, which makes them increasingly hard to find, or adding more and more topics and subtopics to it, which only shifts the mess to another level. The first system is designed to find things you deliberately search for, putting all the responsibility on your brain. The slip-box is designed to present you with ideas you have already forgotten, allowing your brain to focus on thinking instead of remembering. ([Location 795](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=795))
        - Even though the slip-box, being organised bottom-up, does not face the trade-off problem between too many or too few topics, it too can lose its value when notes are added to it indiscriminately.** It can only play out its strengths when we aim for a critical mass, which depends not only on the number of notes, but also their quality and the way they are handled. **([Location 799](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=799))
        - To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes:
            1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two.
            2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box.
            3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished. ([Location 802](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=802))
        - Only if the notes of these three categories are kept separated it will be possible to build a critical mass of ideas within the slip-box. **One of the major reasons for not getting much writing or publishing done lies in the confusion of these categories.** ([Location 812](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=812))
        - A typical mistake is made by many diligent students who are adhering to the advice to keep a scientific journal. ([Location 814](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=814))
            - As he treats every note as if it belongs to the “permanent” category, the notes will never build up a critical mass. The collection of good ideas is diluted to insignificance by all the other notes, which are only relevant for a specific project or actually not that good on second sight. ([Location 817](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=817))
            - On top of that, the strict chronological order does not offer any help to find, combine or rearrange ideas in a productive sense. ([Location 819](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=819))
        - The second typical mistake is to collect notes only related to specific projects. ([Location 822](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=822))
            - The disadvantage is that you have to start all over after each project and cut off all other promising lines of thought. ([Location 823](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=823))
            - If you try to mitigate the effect by opening a new folder for every potential new project whenever you stumble upon something that might be interesting for that, you will soon end up with an overwhelming amount of unfinished projects. ([Location 825](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=825))
        - The third typical mistake is, of course, to treat all notes as fleeting ones. ([Location 830](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=830))
            - You can easily spot this approach by the mess that comes with it, or rather by the cycle of slowly growing piles of material followed by the impulse for major clean-ups. ([Location 830](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=830))
        - **What all these category-confusing approaches have in common is that the benefit of note-taking decreases with the number of notes you keep. **([Location 833](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=833))
            - Fleeting notes are only useful if you review them within a day or so and turn them into proper notes you can use later. ([Location 844](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=844))
            - Permanent notes, on the other hand, are written in a way that can still be understood even when you have forgotten the context they are taken from. ([Location 848](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=848))
        - Most ideas will not stand the test of time, while others might become the seed for a major project. Unfortunately, they are not easy to distinguish right away. ([Location 849](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=849))
        - ^^In contrast to the fleeting notes, every permanent note for the slip-box is elaborated enough to have the potential to become part of or inspire a final written piece, but that can not be decided on up front as their relevance depends on future thinking and developments. The notes are no longer reminders of thoughts or ideas, but contain the actual thought or idea in written form. This is a crucial difference. ^^([Location 864](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=864))
    - 7  Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch ([Location 903](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=903))
        - In order to develop a good question to write about or find the best angle for an assignment, one must already have put some thought into a topic. To be able to decide on a topic, one must already have read quite a bit and certainly not just about one topic. And the decision to read something and not something else is obviously rooted in prior understanding, and that didn’t come out of thin air, either. **Every intellectual endeavour starts from an already existing preconception, which then can be transformed during further inquires and can serve as a starting point for following endeavours. **([Location 919](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=919))
        - We have to read with a pen in hand, develop ideas on paper and build up an ever-growing pool of externalised thoughts. ([Location 929](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=929))
        - ^^By focusing on what is interesting and keeping written track of your own intellectual development, topics, questions and arguments will emerge from the material without force. ^^([Location 933](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=933))
        - **If you haven’t written along the way, the brain is indeed the only place to turn to. On its own, it is not such a great choice: it is neither objective nor reliable – two quite important aspects in academic or nonfiction writing. **([Location 944](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=944))
        - **Taking smart notes is the precondition to break with the linear order. **([Location 953](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=953))
    - 8  Let the Work Carry You Forward ([Location 984](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=984))
        - ^^A good workflow can easily turn into a virtuous circle, where the positive experience motivates us to take on the next task with ease, which helps us to get better at what we are doing, which in return makes it more likely for us to enjoy the work, and so on. ^^([Location 991](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=991))
            - Any attempts to trick ourselves into work with external rewards (like doing something nice after finishing a chapter) are only short-term solutions with no prospect of establishing a positive feedback loop. These are very fragile motivational constructions. Only if the work itself becomes rewarding can the dynamic of motivation and reward become self-sustainable and propel the whole process forward (DePasque and Tricomi, 2015). ([Location 995](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=995))
        - Feedback loops are not only crucial for the dynamics of motivation, but also the key element to any learning process. **Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. **Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, or in the more general terms of psychologist Carol Dweck, to grow. ([Location 1007](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1007))
            - Ironically, it is therefore often the highly gifted and talented students, who receive a lot of praise, who are more in danger of developing a fixed mindset and getting stuck. Having been praised for what they are (talented and gifted) rather than for what they do, they tend to focus on keeping this impression intact, rather than exposing themselves to new challenges and the possibility of learning from failure. ([Location 1014](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1014))
        - Reading with a pen in the hand, for example, forces, us to think about what we read and check upon our understanding. It is the simplest test: We tend to think we understand what we read – until we try to rewrite it in our own words. By doing this, we not only get a better sense of our ability to understand, but also increase our ability to clearly and concisely express our understanding – which in return helps to grasp ideas more quickly. ([Location 1031](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1031))
        - ^^The slip-box is not a collection of notes. Working with it is less about retrieving specific notes and more about being pointed to relevant facts and generating insight by letting ideas mingle. ^^([Location 1048](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1048))
    - The Six Steps to Successful Writing ([Location 1066](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1066))
    - 9  Separate and Interlocking Tasks ([Location 1069](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1069))
        - 9.1      Give Each Task Your Undivided Attention ([Location 1071](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1071))
        - 9.2      Multitasking is not a good idea ([Location 1085](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1085))
            - While those who multitasked felt more productive, their productivity actually decreased – a lot ([Location 1095](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1095))
            - Not only the quantity but also the quality of their accomplishments lagged significantly behind that of the control group. ([Location 1096](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1096))
            - But what is most interesting about these studies is not the fact that the productivity and the quality of the work decreases with multitasking, but that it also impairs the ability to deal with more than one thing at a time! ([Location 1098](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1098))
            - Trying to multitask fatigues us and decreases our ability to deal with more than one task. ([Location 1104](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1104))
            - It is not only impossible to focus on more than one thing at a time, but also to have a different kind of attention on more than one thing at a time. ([Location 1115](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1115))
            - **The good news is that we can train ourselves to stay focused on one thing for longer if we avoid multitasking, remove possible distractions and separate different kinds of tasks as much as possible so they will not interfere with each other. **([Location 1128](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1128))
                - This too is not just a question of having the right mindset, but, equally important, of how we organise our workflow. ([Location 1130](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1130))
        - 9.3      Give Each Task the Right Kind of Attention ([Location 1135](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1135))
            - #[[Literature Notes]] Clearly delineate each step of writing. They all require different skills and effort and should be done individually. For example, trying to create and edit at the same time typically results in slow, disjointed writing
            - it becomes obvious how different the tasks are that are usually summarised under “writing” and how different the kinds of attention are that they require. ([Location 1137](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1137))
            - If we proofread a manuscript and don’t manage to get enough distance from ourselves as authors, we will only see our thoughts, not the actual text. ([Location 1146](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1146))
            - Letting the inner critic interfere with the author isn’t helpful, either. Here we have to focus our attention on our thoughts. If the critic constantly and prematurely interferes whenever a sentence isn’t perfect yet, we would never get anything on paper. ([Location 1150](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1150))
            - If we try to please the critical reader instantly, our workflow would come to a standstill. We tend to call extremely slow writers, who always try to write as if for print, perfectionists. Even though it sounds like praise for extreme professionalism, it is not: A real professional would wait until it was time for proofreading, so he or she can focus on one thing at a time. While proofreading requires more focused attention, finding the right words during writing requires much more floating attention. ([Location 1153](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1153))
            - Psychologists used to associate scientific work exclusively with focused attention, while other, more floating kinds of attention were exclusively associated with creative work like art. We know today that we need both kinds of attention for art and science. ([Location 1177](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1177))
            - “Specifically, the problem-solving behavior of eminent scientists can alternate between extraordinary levels of focus on specific concepts and playful exploration of ideas. This suggests that successful problem solving may be a function of flexible strategy application in relation to task demands.” (Vartanian 2009, 57) ([Location 1180](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1180))
            - What psychologists do not discuss, though, are the external conditions that allow us to be flexible in the first place. ([Location 1187](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1187))
            - it does not help us to have great insight into the necessity of being flexible in our work if we are stuck in a rigid organisation. ([Location 1191](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1191))
            - Unfortunately, the most common way people organise their writing is by making plans. Although planning is almost universally recommended by study guides, it’s the equivalent of putting oneself on rails. **Don’t make plans. Become an expert.** ([Location 1193](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1193))
        - 9.4      Become an Expert Instead of a Planner ([Location 1196](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1196))
            - no one would ever learn the art of productive academic writing just by following plans or linear, multistep prescripts – one would learn only to follow plans or prescripts. The widespread praise for planning rests on the misconception that a process like writing an academic text, which is highly dependent on cognition and thinking, can rely on conscious decision-making alone. But academic writing is an art, as well, which means it is something we can become better at with experience and deliberate practice. ([Location 1208](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1208))
            - **Experts rely on embodied experience, which enables them to reach the state of virtuosity.** An expert in academic writing has a feel for the process, an acquired intuition for which task will bring one closer to the finished manuscript and what is only a distraction. ([Location 1212](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1212))
            - ^^Most study guides and academic writing teachers are trying very hard to spare you from that experience by telling you what, when and how to write instead. But they are keeping you from learning the very thing academia and writing is all about: gaining insight and making it public. ^^([Location 1219](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1219))
            - Teachers tend to mistake the ability to follow (their) rules with the ability to make the right choices in real situations. ([Location 1231](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1231))
            - Experts, on the other hand, have internalised the necessary knowledge so they don’t have to actively remember rules or think consciously about their choices. ([Location 1238](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1238))
            - Chess players seem to think less than beginners. Rather, they see patterns and let themselves be guided by their experience from the past rather than attempt to calculate turns far into the future. But like in professional chess, the intuition of professional academic and nonfiction writing can also only be gained by systematic exposure to feedback loops and experience, which means that success in academic writing depends to a great degree on the organization of its practical side. ([Location 1246](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1246))
                - **Note**: This relates to both Range and Thinking in Bets
        - 9.5      Get Closure ([Location 1259](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1259))
            - Attention is not our only limited resource. Our short-term memory is also limited. We need strategies not to waste its capacity with thoughts we can better delegate to an external system. ([Location 1261](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1261))
            - Information cannot be saved in short-term memory like on a memory stick. Rather, it kind of floats around in our heads, seeks our attention and occupies valuable mental resources until it is either forgotten, replaced by something more important (according to our brains) or moved into long-term memory. ([Location 1265](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1265))
            - This is why it is so much easier to remember things we understand than things we don’t. It is not that we have to choose to focus either on learning or understanding. It is always about understanding – and if it is only for the sake of learning. **Things we understand are connected, either through rules, theories, narratives, pure logic, mental models or explanations. And deliberately building these kinds of meaningful connections is what the slip-box is all about.** ([Location 1280](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1280))
            - the Zeigarnik effect: Open tasks tend to occupy our short-term memory – until they are done. That is why we get so easily distracted by thoughts of unfinished tasks, regardless of their importance. ([Location 1297](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1297))
            - ^^But thanks to Zeigarnik’s follow-up research, we also know that we don’t actually have to finish tasks to convince our brains to stop thinking about them. All we have to do is to write them down in a way that convinces us that it will be taken care of. ^^([Location 1299](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1299))
            - The first step is to break down the amorphous task of “writing” into smaller pieces of different tasks that can be finished in one go. The second step is to make sure we always write down the outcome of our thinking, including possible connections to further inquiries. As the outcome of each task is written down and possible connections become visible, it is easy to pick up the work any time where we left it without having to keep it in mind all the time. [22] ([Location 1308](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1308))
            - Conversely, we can use the Zeigarnik effect to our advantage by deliberately keeping unanswered questions in our mind. We can ruminate about them, even when we do something that has nothing to do with work and ideally does not require our full attention. ([Location 1319](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1319))
            - By taking into account these little insights into how our brains work, we can make sure that we will not get distracted by thoughts of what we need from the supermarket when we sit at the desk. Rather, we may solve a crucial problem while we run errands. ([Location 1323](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1323))
        - 9.6      Reduce the Number of Decisions ([Location 1326](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1326))
            - the third limited resource is motivation or willpower. ([Location 1329](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1329))
            - Today, willpower is compared to muscles: a limited resource that depletes quickly and needs time to recover. Improvement through training is possible to a certain degree, but takes time and effort. The phenomenon is usually discussed under the term “ego depletion”: “We use the term ego depletion to refer to a temporary reduction in the self’s capacity or willingness to engage in volitional action (including controlling the environment, controlling the self, making choices, and initiating action) caused by prior exercise of volition.” (Baumeister et al., 1998, 1253) ([Location 1333](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1333))
            - The smartest way to deal with this kind of limitation is to cheat. Instead of forcing ourselves to do something we don’t feel like doing, we need to find a way to make us feel like doing what moves our project further along. ([Location 1347](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1347))
            - In the way we organise our research and writing, we too can significantly reduce the amount of decisions we have to make. ([Location 1355](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1355))
            - While content-related decisions have to be made (on what is more and what is less important in an article, on the connections between notes, the structure of a text, etc.), most organisational decisions can be made up front, once and for all, by deciding on one system. ([Location 1356](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1356))
            - By always using the same notebook for making quick notes, always extracting the main ideas from a text in the same way and always turning them into the same kind of permanent notes, which are always dealt with in the same manner, the number of decisions during a work session can be greatly reduced. ([Location 1358](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1358))
            - Being able to finish a task in a timely manner and to pick up the work exactly where we left it has another enjoyable advantage that helps to restore our attention: We can have breaks without fear of losing the thread. ([Location 1361](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1361))
            - Breaks are much more than just opportunities to recover. They are crucial for learning. They allow the brain to process information, move it into long-term memory and prepare it for new information ([Location 1363](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1363))
    - 10   Read for Understanding ([Location 1371](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1371))
    - 10.1   Read With a Pen in Hand ([Location 1377](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1377))
    - To get a good paper written, you only have to rewrite a good draft; to get a good draft written, you only have to turn a series of notes into a continuous text. And as a series of notes is just the rearrangement of notes you already have in your slip-box, all you really have to do is have a pen in your hand when you read. ([Location 1379](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1379))
    - The series of notes in the slip-box develops into arguments, which are shaped by the theories, ideas and mental models you have in your head. And the theories, ideas and mental models in your head are also shaped by the things you read. They are constantly changing and challenged by the surprising connections with which the slip-box confronts you. The richer the slip-box becomes, the richer your own thinking becomes. The slip-box is an idea generator that develops in lockstep with your own intellectual development. Together, you can turn previously separated or even isolated facts into a critical mass of interconnected ideas. ([Location 1384](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1384))
    - Translating means to give the truest possible account of the original work, using different words – it does not mean the freedom to make something fit. As well, the mere copying of quotes almost always changes their meaning by stripping them out of context, even though the words aren’t changed. This is a common beginner mistake, which can only lead to a patchwork of ideas, but never a coherent thought. ([Location 1398](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1398))
    - How extensive the literature notes should be really depends on the text and what we need it for. It also depends on our ability to be concise, the complexity of the text and how difficult it is to understand. ([Location 1407](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1407))
    - Whenever we explore a new, unfamiliar subject, our notes will tend to be more extensive, but we shouldn’t get nervous about it, as this is the deliberate practice of understanding we cannot skip. ([Location 1414](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1414))
    - And what is most helpful is to reflect on the frame, the theoretical background, methodological approach or perspective of the text we read. That often means to reflect as much on what is not mentioned as what is mentioned. ([Location 1417](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1417))
    - By employing often-recommended reading techniques like SQ3R or SQ4R, they treat every text the same, regardless of the content. They do not clearly decide on the format and the organisation of their notes and do not have a plan for what to do with them afterwards. ([Location 1421](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1421))
    - 10.2   Keep an Open Mind ([Location 1454](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1454))
    - Confirmation bias is a subtle but major force. As the psychologist Raymond Nickerson puts it: “If one were to attempt to identify a single problematic aspect of human reasoning that deserves attention above all others, the confirmation bias would have to be among the candidates for consideration” (Nickerson 1998, 175). ([Location 1468](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1468))
    - Confirmation bias is tackled here in two steps: First, by turning the whole writing process on its head, and secondly, by changing the incentives from finding confirming facts to an indiscriminate gathering of any relevant information regardless of what argument it will support. ([Location 1481](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1481))
    - This is a good rule of thumb: If insight becomes a threat to your academic or writing success, you are doing it wrong. ([Location 1488](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1488))
    - The slip-box forces us to be selective in reading and note-taking, but the only criterion is the question of whether something adds to a discussion in the slip-box. The only thing that matters is that it connects or is open to connections. ([Location 1502](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1502))
    - After aligning our interests, we can go a step further and prime ourselves for seeking out dis-confirming facts. Collecting only one-sided ideas wouldn’t be very enriching. Yes, we have to be selective, but not in terms of pros and cons, but in terms of relevant or irrelevant. And as soon we focus on the content of the slip-box, dis-confirming data becomes suddenly very attractive, because it opens up more possible connections and discussions within the slip-box, while mere confirming data does not. ([Location 1508](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1508))
    - 10.3   Get the Gist ([Location 1521](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1521))
    - The ability to distinguish relevant from less relevant information is another skill that can only be learned by doing. ([Location 1523](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1523))
    - But with the learned ability of spotting patterns, we can enter the circle of virtuosity: Reading becomes easier, we grasp the gist quicker, can read more in less time, and can more easily spot patterns and improve our understanding of them. ([Location 1532](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1532))
        - **Note**: This feels reminiscent of the deliberate practice of chess in Range
    - ‘Have the courage to use your own understanding,’ is therefore the motto of the Enlightenment.” (Kant 1784) ([Location 1542](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1542))
    - I suggest taking this literally. The ability to use one’s own understanding is a challenge, not a given. Luhmann stresses the importance of permanent notes in this regard: “The problem with reading academic texts seems to be that we need not the short-term memory, but the long-term memory to develop reference points for distinguishing the important things from the less important, the new information from the mere repeated. But it is of course impossible to remember everything. That would be rote learning. To put it differently: One has to read extremely selectively and extract widespread and connected references. One has to be able to follow recurrences. But how to learn it if guidance is impossible? […] Probably the best method is to take notes – not excerpts, but condensed reformulated accounts of a text. Rewriting what was already written almost automatically trains one to shift the attention towards frames, patterns and categories in the observations, or the conditions/assumptions, which enable certain, but not other descriptions. It makes sense to always ask the question: What is not meant, what is excluded if a certain claim is made? If someone speaks of ‘human rights:’ What distinction is made? A distinction towards ‘non-human rights?’ ‘Human duties?’ Is it a cultural comparison or one with some historic people who didn’t have the concept of human rights, but lived okay together anyway? Often, the text does not give an answer or a clear answer to this question. But then one has to resort to one’s own imagination.” (Luhmann 2000, 154f) ([Location 1543](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1543))
    - 10.4   Learn to Read ([Location 1567](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1567))
    - The most important advantage of writing is that it helps us to confront ourselves when we do not understand something as well as we would like to believe. ([Location 1580](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1580))
    - The attempt to rephrase an argument in our own words confronts us without mercy with all the gaps in our understanding. It certainly feels less good, but this struggle is the only chance we have to improve our understanding, to learn and move forward ([Location 1589](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1589))
    - This is why choosing an external system that forces us to deliberate practice and confronts us as much as possible with our lack of understanding or not-yet-learned information is such a smart move. We only have to make the conscious choice once. ([Location 1607](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1607))
        - **Note**: The choice that makes 1,000 future decisions-Essentialism
    - 10.5   Learn by Reading ([Location 1609](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1609))
    - A coach is not there to do the work, but to show us how to use our time and effort in the most effective way. What is self-evident in sports we are only starting to realise is true for learning as well. “The one who does the work does the learning,” writes Doyle (2008, 63). It is hard to believe, but in education that is still a revolutionary idea. ([Location 1614](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1614))
    - In short: Pure re-viewing just doesn’t make any sense, neither for understanding nor for learning. It is debatable if we even can call it learning. ([Location 1646](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1646))
    - It is not surprising, therefore, that the best-researched and most successful learning method is elaboration. ([Location 1648](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1648))
    - Working with the slip-box, therefore, doesn’t mean storing information in there instead of in your head, i.e. not learning. On the contrary, it facilitates real, long-term learning. It just means not cramming isolated facts into your brain – something you probably wouldn’t want to do anyway. The objection that it takes too much time to take notes and sort them into the slip-box is therefore short-sighted. Writing, taking notes and thinking about how ideas connect is exactly the kind of elaboration that is needed to learn. Not learning from what we read because we don’t take the time to elaborate on it is the real waste of time. ([Location 1658](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1658))
    - 11   Take Smart Notes ([Location 1669](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1669))
    - Experienced academic readers usually read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches, while inexperienced readers tend to adopt the question of a text and the frames of the argument and take it as a given. What good readers can do is spot the limitations of a particular approach and see what is not mentioned in the text. ([Location 1673](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1673))
    - Even doctoral students sometimes just collect de-contextualised quotes from a text – probably the worst possible approach to research imaginable. This makes it almost impossible to understand the actual meaning of information. Without understanding information within its context, it is also impossible to go beyond it, to reframe it and to think about what it could mean for another question. ([Location 1678](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1678))
    - 11.1   Make a Career One Note at a Time ([Location 1690](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1690))
    - And likewise, the sum of the slip-box content is worth much more than the sum of the notes. More notes mean more possible connections, more ideas, more synergy between different projects and therefore a much higher degree of productivity. Luhmann’s slip-box contains about 90,000 notes, which sounds like an incredibly large number. But it only means that he wrote six notes a day from the day he started to work with his slip-box until he died. ([Location 1719](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1719))
    - 11.2   Think Outside the Brain ([Location 1728](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1728))
    - Taking literature notes is a form of deliberate practice as it gives us feedback on our understanding or lack of it, while the effort to put into our own words the gist of something is at the same time the best approach to understanding what we read. Taking permanent notes of our own thoughts is a form of self-testing as well: do they still make sense in writing? Are we even able to get the thought on paper? Do we have the references, facts and supporting sources at hand? And at the same time, writing it is the best way to get our thoughts in order. Writing here, too, is not copying, but translating (from one context and from one medium into another). No written piece is ever a copy of a thought in our mind. ([Location 1730](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1730))
    - When we take permanent notes, it is much more a form of thinking within the medium of writing and in dialogue with the already existing notes within the slip-box than a protocol of preconceived ideas. ([Location 1737](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1737))
    - Luhmann states as clearly as possible: it is not possible to think systematically without writing (Luhmann 1992, 53). Most people still think about thinking as a purely internal process, and believe that the only function of the pen is to put finished thoughts on paper. ([Location 1750](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1750))
    - Almost all agree nowadays that real thinking requires some kind of externalization, especially in the form of writing. ([Location 1763](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1763))
        - **Note**: Philosophers, neuroscientists, educators, and psychiatrists
    - A common way to embed an idea into the context of the slip-box is by writing out the reasons of its importance for your own lines of thought. ([Location 1772](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1772))
    - But the first question I asked myself when it came to writing the first permanent note for the slip-box was: What does this all mean for my own research and the questions I think about in my slip-box? This is just another way of asking: Why did the aspects I wrote down catch my interest? ([Location 1783](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1783))
    - As someone with a sociological perspective on political questions and an interest in the project of a theory of society, my first note reads plainly: “Any comprehensive analysis of social inequality must include the cognitive effects of scarcity. Cf. Mullainathan and Shafir 2013.” This immediately triggers further questions, which I can discuss on following notes, starting with: “Why?” ([Location 1786](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1786))
    - Just by writing down these questions and making possible connections explicit in writing are the concepts and theories being investigated. Their limitations become as visible as their particular angle on a problem. By explicitly writing down how something connects or leads to something else, we force ourselves to clarify and distinguish ideas from each other. ([Location 1805](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1805))
    - 11.3   Learn by not Trying ([Location 1809](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1809))
    - Transferring ideas into the external memory also allows us to forget them. And even though it sounds paradoxical, forgetting actually facilitates long-term learning. ([Location 1820](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1820))
    - distinguishing between two different measurements when it comes to memory: Storage strength and retrieval strength (Bjork 2011). They speculate that storage strength, the ability to store memories, only becomes greater over one’s lifetime. ([Location 1862](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1862))
    - It is difficult, if not impossible, to verify this claim, but it does make sense to shift the attention from storage strength to retrieval strength. Learning would be not so much about saving information, like on a hard disk, but about building connections and bridges between pieces of information to circumvent the inhibition mechanism in the right moment. It is about making sure that the right “cues” trigger the right memory, about how we can think strategically to remember the most useful information when we need it. ([Location 1866](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1866))
    - What does help for true, useful learning is to connect a piece of information to as many meaningful contexts as possible, which is what we do when we connect our notes in the slip-box with other notes. Making these connections deliberately means building up a self-supporting network of interconnected ideas and facts that work reciprocally as cues for each other. ([Location 1887](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1887))
    - But elaboration is nothing more than connecting information to other information in a meaningful way. ([Location 1913](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1913))
    - The first step of elaboration is to think enough about a piece of information so we are able to write about it. The second step is to think about what it means for other contexts as well. ([Location 1913](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1913))
    - If you focus your time and energy on understanding, you cannot help but learn. But if you focus your time and energy on learning without trying to understand, you will not only not understand, but also probably not learn. And the effects are cumulative. ([Location 1930](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1930))
    - That the slip-box is not sorted by topics is the precondition for actively building connections between notes. Connections can be made between heterogeneous notes – as long as the connection makes sense. ([Location 1941](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1941))
    - The slip-box is forcing us to do the exact opposite: To elaborate, to understand, to connect and therefore to learn seriously. ([Location 1943](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1943))
        - **Note**: In contrast to the typical silos information comes in - discipline, files, topic, etc.
    - The fact that too much order can impede learning has become more and more known (Carey 2014). Conversely, we know that the deliberate creation of… ([Location 1945](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1945))
        - **Note**: The brain likes novelty. This sounds similar to the variable rewards leading to additional attempts
    - elaborating on the differences and similarities of notes instead of sorting them by topic not only facilitates learning, but facilitates the ability to… ([Location 1950](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1950))
    - 11.4   Adding Permanent Notes to… ([Location 1952](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1952))
    - 1.  Add a note to the slip-box either behind the note you directly refer to or, if you do not follow up on a specific note, just behind… ([Location 1956](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1956))
    - it consecutively. The Zettelkasten numbers the notes automatically. “New note” will just add a note with a new number. If you click “New note sequence,” the new note will be registered at the same time as the note that follows the note currently active on the screen. But you can always add notes “behind” other notes anytime later. Each… ([Location 1957](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1957))
        - **Note**: Is this relevant in Roam?
    - 2.  Add links to other notes or links on other notes to your new note. 3.  Make sure it can be found from the index; add an entry in the index if necessary or refer to it from a note that is connected to… ([Location 1961](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1961))
        - **Note**: Do you maintain an index, or will header pages suffice?
    - 12   Develop… ([Location 1968](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1968))
    - “Every note is just an element in the network of references and back references in the system, from which it… ([Location 1970](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1970))
        - **Note**: Where good ideas come from - liquid Networks
    - If the existing note bore the number 21, he numbered the new note 22. If note number 22 already existed, he would still add it behind 21, but number it 21a. By alternating numbers and letters, he was able to branch out into an infinite number of… ([Location 1975](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1975))
        - **Note**: Is this with zettels? l am having trouble reconciling the atomic nature with these branches. Also, what is the workflow in Roam
    - An initial subsequence that attracts more and more follow-up notes can easily become a main topic with many subtopics over time (Schmidt 2013, 172). The digital Zettelkasten makes things easier: numbers are assigned automatically, note sequences can be constructed any time later and… ([Location 1978](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1978))
    - These note sequences are the backbone of text development. They combine the advantages of an abstract with a topic-related order. A pure topic-related order would have to be organised top down and requires a hierarchical order up front. A pure abstract order would not allow idea clusters and topics to be built bottom up. The individual notes would stay mostly independent and isolated with only one-dimensional references – pretty much like a one-person Wikipedia stripped of the knowledge and fact-checking abilities of the community. But a loose order of sequences allows freedom to change course… ([Location 1981](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1981))
    - 12.1   Develop Topics ([Location 1998](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=1998))
    - This crucial element of surprise comes into play on the level of the interconnected notes, not when we are looking for particular entries in the index. Most notes will be found through other notes. ([Location 2009](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2009))
    - The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it? The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference. ([Location 2022](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2022))
        - **Note**: Refer to CH 5in Range, thinking in analogies to get to structural issues instead of superficial categorization.
    - Keywords should always be assigned with an eye towards the topics you are working on or interested in, never by looking at the note in isolation. ([Location 2046](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2046))
    - Good keywords are usually not already mentioned as words in the note. Assume I have the note “A sudden increase of ad-hoc theories is for Kuhn a sign that a normal-science phase might be in crisis (Kuhn 1967, 96).” A fitting keyword might be “paradigm change,” but that phrase is not in the note and therefore would not be suggested by the program. ([Location 2050](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2050))
    - 12.2   Make Smart Connections ([Location 2055](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2055))
    - making good cross-references is a matter of serious thinking and a crucial part of the development of thoughts. ([Location 2059](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2059))
    - The first type of links are those on notes that are giving you the overview of a topic. These are notes directly referred to from the index and usually used as an entry point into a topic that has already developed to such a degree that an overview is needed or at least becomes helpful. ([Location 2064](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2064))
    - This kind of note helps to structure thoughts and can be seen as an in-between step towards the development of a manuscript. Above all, they help orientate oneself within the slip-box. You will know when you need to write one. Luhmann collected up to 25 links to other notes on these kind of entry notes. They don’t have to be written in one go as links can be added over time, which again shows how topics can grow organically. What we think is relevant for a topic and what is not depends on our current understanding and should be taken quite seriously: It defines an idea as much as the facts it is based on. What we regard as being relevant for a topic and how we structure it will change over time. This change might lead to another note with a different, more adequate topic structure, which then can be seen as a comment on the previous note. Thankfully, it won’t make all the other notes redundant. As mentioned before: All we have to do is to change the entry in the index to this new note and/or indicate on the old note that we now consider a new structure more fitting. ([Location 2068](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2068))
    - The most common form of reference is plain note-to-note links. They have no function other than indicating a relevant connection between two individual notes. By linking two related notes regardless of where they are within the slip-box or within different contexts, surprising new lines of thought can be established. ([Location 2087](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2087))
    - These note-to-note links are like the “weak links” (Granovetter 1973) of social relationships we have with acquaintances: even though they are usually not the ones we turn to first, they often can offer new and different perspectives. ([Location 2089](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2089))
    - Patterns might not become visible right away, but they might emerge after multiple note-to-note links between two topics have been established. ([Location 2093](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2093))
    - It is important to always keep in mind that making these links is not a chore, a kind of file-box maintenance. The search for meaningful connections is a crucial part of the thinking process towards the finished manuscript. But here, it is dealt with in a very concrete way. Instead of figuratively searching our internal memory, we literally go through the file-box and look for connections. By dealing with actual notes, we are also less prone to imagine connections where there aren’t any, as we can see in black and white if something makes sense or not. ([Location 2099](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2099))
    - The slip-box is like a well-informed but down-to-earth communication partner who keeps us grounded. If we try to feed it some lofty ideas, it will force us to check first: What is the reference? How does that connect to the facts and the ideas you already have? ([Location 2106](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2106))
    - 12.3   Compare, Correct and Differentiate ([Location 2109](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2109))
    - If you use the slip-box for a while, you will inevitably make a sobering discovery: The great new idea you are about to add to the slip-box turns out to be already in there. Even worse, chances are this idea wasn’t even yours, but someone else’s. ([Location 2111](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2111))
    - Therefore, working with the slip-box is disillusioning, but at the same time it increases the chance that we actually move forward in our thinking towards uncharted territory, instead of just feeling like we are moving forward. ([Location 2115](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2115))
    - Comparing notes also helps us to detect contradictions, paradoxes or oppositions – important facilitators for insight. When we realise that we used to accept two contradicting ideas as equally true, we know that we have a problem – and problems are good because we now have something to solve. A paradox can be a sign that we haven’t thought thoroughly enough about a problem or, conversely, that we exhausted the possibilities of a certain paradigm. Finally, oppositions help to shape ideas by providing contrast. Albert Rothenberg suggests that the construction of oppositions is the most reliable way of generating new ideas (Rothenberg 1971; 1996; 2015). ([Location 2127](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2127))
        - **Note**: I like this a lot. It reminds me of the paradox in Thinking in Bets: people are loss-averse, but they will stick with a losing strategy when they think it is "lucky"
    - The constant comparing of notes also serves as an ongoing examination of old notes in a new light. ([Location 2132](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2132))
        - **Note**: The slow hunch
    - Adding new ([Location 2136](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2136))
    - notes to old notes and being forced to compare them leads not only to a constant improvement of one’s own work, but often discloses weaknesses in the texts we read. ([Location 2136](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2136))
    - The slip-box not only confronts us with dis-confirming information, but also helps with what is known as the feature-positive effect (Allison and Messick 1988; Newman, Wolff, and Hearst 1980; Sainsbury 1971). This is the phenomenon in which we tend to overstate the importance of information that is (mentally) easily available to us and tilts our thinking towards the most recently acquired facts, not necessarily the most relevant ones. Without external help, we would not only take exclusively into account what we know, but what is on top of our heads.[35] ([Location 2140](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2140))
        - **Note**: I am worried about this now with so many of my books reinforcing each other
    - 12.4   Assemble a Toolbox for Thinking ([Location 2147](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2147))
    - Our ability to read a situation or to interpret information depends on our broader knowledge and how we make sense of it. ([Location 2157](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2157))
        - **Note**: Hello, Keely
    - A truly wise person is not someone who knows everything, but someone who is able to make sense of things by drawing from an extended resource of interpretation schemes. This stands in harsh contrast to the common but not-so-wise belief that we need to learn from experience. It is much better to learn from the experiences of others – especially when this experience is reflected on and turned into versatile “mental models” that can be used in different situations. ([Location 2174](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2174))
    - If we practice learning not as a pure accumulation of knowledge, but as ([Location 2184](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2184))
    - an attempt to build up a latticework of theories and mental models to which information can stick, we enter a virtuous circle where learning facilitates learning. ([Location 2184](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2184))
    - 12.5   Use the Slip-Box as a Creativity Machine ([Location 2209](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2209))
    - Many exciting stories from scientific history make us believe that great insight comes in a flash. There is the sudden insight of Watson and Crick that DNA would have to have the form of a double helix or the story of Friedrich August Kekulé, who allegedly dreamed of a snake biting its own tail and suddenly saw the structure of benzene in front of his eyes. ([Location 2213](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2213))
        - **Note**: Where good ideas come from
    - But intuition is not the opposition to rationality and knowledge, it is rather the incorporated, practical side of our intellectual endeavours, the sedimented experience on which we build our conscious, explicit knowledge (cf. Ahrens 2014). ([Location 2229](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2229))
    - 12.6   Think Inside the Box ([Location 2250](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2250))
    - Comparing, differentiating and connecting notes are the basis of good academic writing, but playing and tinkering with ideas is what leads to insight and exceptional texts. ([Location 2254](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2254))
    - To be able to play with ideas, we first have to liberate them from their original context by means of abstraction and re-specification. ([Location 2256](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2256))
    - Studies on creativity with engineers show that the ability to find not only creative, but functional and working solutions for technical problems is equal to the ability to make abstractions. The better an engineer is at abstracting from a specific problem, the better and more pragmatic his solutions will be – even for the very problem he abstracted from (Gassmann and Zeschky, 2008, 103). ([Location 2268](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2268))
        - **Note**: What are the crucial differences between abstractions and analogies? Thinking Johannes Kepler from Range, ch 5
    - Abstraction is also the key to analyse and compare concepts, to make analogies and to combine ideas; this is especially true when it comes to interdisciplinary work (Goldstone and Wilensky 2008). ([Location 2271](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2271))
    - The real enemy of independent thinking is not an external authority, but our own inertia. The ability to generate new ideas has more to do with breaking with old habits of thinking than with coming up with as many ideas as possible. For obvious reasons, I do not recommend “thinking outside the box”. On the contrary, we can turn the slip-box into a tool for breaking out of our own thinking habits. ([Location 2281](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2281))
    - Another piece of advice is not a feature of the slip-box and might sound banal, but it is crucial: Make sure that you really see what you think you see and describe it as plainly and factually as possible. Double-check if necessary. ([Location 2293](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2293))
        - **Note**: Compensating for the brain's natural tendency to fill in the blanks.
    - While the constant comparison of notes can help us to detect differences, no technique can help us see what is missing. But we can make it a habit to always ask what is not in the picture, but could be relevant. ([Location 2309](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2309))
    - One possibility to deal with this tendency is to ask counterfactual questions, like “what if?” (Markman, Lindberg, Kray and Galinsky, 2007). It is easier to learn about the function of money in a society if we wonder how strangers would exchange goods without using money than if we just focus on the obvious problems we have in a society based on money exchange. Sometimes, it is more important to rediscover the problems for which we already have a solution than to think solely about the problems that are present to us. ([Location 2332](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2332))
    - Making things more complicated than they are can be a way to avoid the underlying complexity of simple ideas. ([Location 2351](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2351))
    - 12.7   Facilitate Creativity through Restrictions ([Location 2365](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2365))
    - By restricting ourselves to one format, we also restrict ourselves to just one idea per note and force ourselves to be as precise and brief as possible. ([Location 2371](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2371))
    - A good rule of thumb for working with the program is: Each note should fit onto the screen and there should be no need of scrolling. ([Location 2373](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2373))
    - These standardizations make it possible that the technical side of note-taking can become automatic. Not having to think about the organisation is really good news for brains like ours – the few mental resources we have available, we need for thinking about the actual relevant questions: those concerning the contents. ([Location 2378](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2378))
    - The biggest threat to creativity and scientific progress is therefore the opposite: a lack of structure and restrictions. Without structure, we cannot differentiate, compare or experiment with ideas. Without restrictions, we would never be forced to make the decision on what is worth pursuing and what is not. Indifference is the worst environment for insight. ([Location 2403](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2403))
    - 13   Share Your Insight ([Location 2410](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2410))
    - “Writing itself makes you realise where there are holes in things. I’m never sure what I think until I see what I write. ([Location 2412](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2412))
    - Since writing is nothing more than the revision of a rough draft, which is nothing more than turning a series of notes into a continuous text, which are written on a day-to-day basis, connected and indexed in the slip-box, there is no need to worry about finding a topic to write about. Just look into your slip-box and see where clusters have been built up. ([Location 2416](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2416))
    - The perspective changes another time: Now, it is not about understanding something in the context of another author’s argument, and it is also not about looking for multiple connections in the slip-box, but about developing one argument and bringing it into the linearity of a manuscript. ([Location 2423](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2423))
    - Instead of widening the perspective to find as many possible lines of thought to which an idea might contribute, it is now about narrowing the perspective, making a decision on one topic only and cutting out everything that does not directly contribute to the development of the text and support the main argument. ([Location 2425](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2425))
    - 13.1   From Brainstorming to Slip-box-Storming ([Location 2428](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2428))
    - It is the one decision in the beginning, to make writing the mean and the end of the whole intellectual endeavour, that changed the role of topic-finding completely. It is now less about finding a topic to write about and more about working on the questions we generated by writing. ([Location 2466](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2466))
    - If we, on the other hand, let questions arise from the slip-box, we know that they are tried and tested among dozens or even hundreds of other possible questions. The vast majority of questions might have been answered quickly or disappeared as no notes were drawn to them, either because of a lack of interest or a lack of material. This is how evolution works: by trial and error, not planning. ([Location 2474](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2474))
    - Good questions are in the sweet spot of being relevant and interesting, not too easy to answer but possible to tackle with material that is available or at least within our reach. When it comes to finding good questions, it is therefore not enough to think about it. We have to do something with an idea before we know enough about it to make a good judgement. We have to work, write, connect, differentiate, complement and elaborate on questions – but this is what we do when we take smart notes. ([Location 2478](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2478))
    - 13.2   From Top Down to Bottom Up ([Location 2482](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2482))
    - Starting with what we have also comes with another, unexpected advantage: We become more open to new ideas. ([Location 2486](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2486))
    - while the belief in our own ingenuity decreases with expertise, we become more able to actually make a genuine new contribution. ([Location 2492](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2492))
    - 13.3   Getting Things Done by Following Your Interests ([Location 2501](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2501))
    - The risk of losing interest in what we do is high when we decide upfront on a long-term project without much clue about what to expect. We can mitigate this risk considerably by applying a flexible organisation scheme that allows us to change course whenever necessary. ([Location 2510](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2510))
    - If we accompany every step of our work with the question, “What is interesting about this?” and everything we read with the question, “What is so relevant about this that it is worth noting down?” we do not just choose information according to our interest. By elaborating on what we encounter, we also discover aspects we didn’t know anything about before and therefore develop our interests along the way. It would be quite sad if we did not change our interests during research. ([Location 2513](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2513))
    - 13.4   Finishing and Review ([Location 2540](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2540))
    - A key point: Structure the text and keep it flexible. ([Location 2543](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2543))
    - The key is to structure the draft visibly. It is not so much about deciding once and for all what to write in which chapter or paragraph, but what does not need to be written in a particular part of the manuscript. ([Location 2545](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2545))
    - The problem in this stage is almost exactly the opposite of the “blank screen.” Instead of not knowing how to fill the pages, we have so much at hand that we have to curb our impulse to mention everything at the same time. ([Location 2548](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2548))
    - The structure of an argument is part of it and therefore will change during the process of developing it – it is not a vessel to be filled with content. ([Location 2551](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2551))
    - Another key point: Try working on different manuscripts at the same time. ([Location 2555](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2555))
    - This is a setup in which the inevitable by-product of one production line becomes the resource for another, which again produces by-products that can be used in other processes and so on, until a network of production lines becomes so efficiently intertwined that there is no chance of an isolated factory competing with it anymore.[40] ([Location 2557](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2557))
    - 13.5   Becoming an Expert by Giving up Planning ([Location 2576](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2576))
    - The lesson to draw is to be generally sceptical about planning, especially if it is merely focused on the outcome, not on the actual work and the steps required to achieve a goal. While it doesn’t help to imagine oneself the great author of a successful and timely finished paper, it does make a difference if we have a realistic idea about what needs to be done to get there in our minds. ([Location 2602](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2602))
        - **Note**: People chronically underestimate the time to complete a project, especially writing non-fiction
    - The other lesson is not that we can’t learn from our experiences, but that we can only learn from our experiences if feedback follows shortly afterwards – and maybe more than once in a while. ([Location 2609](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2609))
        - **Note**: This argues for breaking the project down to more realistic and actionable tasks.
    - 13.6   The Actual Writing ([Location 2635](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2635))
    - Slavoj Žižek said in an interview[41] that he wouldn’t be able to write a single sentence if he didn’t start by convincing himself he was only writing down some ideas for himself, and that maybe he could turn it into something publishable later. By the time he stopped writing, he was always surprised to find that the only thing left to do was revise the draft he already had. ([Location 2643](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2643))
    - One of the most difficult tasks is to rigorously delete what has no function within an argument – “kill your darlings.”[42] This becomes much easier when you move the questionable passages into another document and tell yourself you might use them later. For every document I write, I have another called “xy-rest.doc,” and every single time I cut something, I copy it into the other document, convincing myself that I will later look through it and add it back where it might fit. Of course, it never happens – but it still works. Others who know a thing or two about psychology do the same (cf. Thaler, 2015, 81f). ([Location 2648](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2648))
    - 14   Make It a Habit ([Location 2655](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2655))
    - We have the best chance to change our behaviour over the long term if we start with a realistic idea about the difficulties of behavioural change (Dean 2013). ([Location 2670](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2670))
    - “Those with the strongest habits who were the least successful in predicting their behaviour over the coming week were the most confident in their predictions. The finding is striking because it hints at one of the dark sides of habits. When we perform an action repeatedly, its familiarity seems to bleed back into our judgments about that behavior. We end up feeling we have more control over precisely the behaviours that, in reality, we have the least control over. It’s another example of our thought processes working in the opposite way to our intuitive expectations.” (Dean 2013, 22) ([Location 2673](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2673))
        - **Note**: Does this relate to Thinking in Bets?
    - The trick is not to try to break with old habits and also not to use willpower to force oneself to do something else, but to strategically build up new habits that have a chance to replace the old ones. ([Location 2678](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B06WVYW33Y&location=2678))
