- About me
    - I love learning and do a lot of reading in aid of this. I'm very interested in ways of making my reading and learning more efficient and effective, and this is what has attracted me to Roam and now to this book club. 
- Website:: https://twitter.com/JoelDignam
- Company:: [Better Renting](http://betterrenting.org.au/) 
- Conventions
    - write in my own page or daily notes use liberal tags.
    - Use daily notes also. 
- Literature Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
        - #Writing, not reading, is the fundamental practice of "research, learning, or studying".
        - I love this idea that by constantly writing and formulating my ideas they are always ready in a thousand component pieces to be assembled as I see fit. I wonder if this also improves my #cognition itself - makes me more likely to think in terms of coherent paragraphs and ideas? 
        - If we can change the environment so that tasks will be interesting, meaningful, and well-defined, then it will be easier to do tasks - it will not require/consume #willpower.
            - But does it take willpower to do the note-taking practice? 
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - Worth noting that this is yet another man whose output was supported by a woman, although at least in this case it sounds like it was a paid housekeeper and not an unpaid wife. 
        - "He did not just copy ideas or quotes from the texts he read, but made a transition from one context to another. It was very much like a translation where you use different words that fit a different context, but strive to keep the original meaning as truthfully as possible. Writing that an author struggles in one chapter to justify his method can be a much more adequate description of this chapter’s content than any quote from the text itself (this would call for an explanation, of course)."
            - This idea of "#translation" from what you read to putting it in your own words and ideas sounds super useful - I don't do this. I wonder if kindle defeats this a bit because of the ease of highlighting?
        - "By adding these links between notes, Luhmann was able to add the same note to different contexts. While other systems start with a preconceived order of topics, Luhmann developed topics bottom up, then added another note to his slip-box, on which he would sort a topic by sorting the links of the relevant other notes."
            - This is a fascinating idea - of just doing general research and note-taking and seeing what emerges. But you could also be doing specific research and jotting down incidental ideas that then end up being useful or relevant to something else.
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - "Granted, writing these notes is the main work. It will take enormous amounts of effort, time, patience and willpower, and you will probably break under the weight of this task. Just kidding. It is the easiest part of all. Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head. “Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible,” neuroscientist Neil Levy concludes in the introduction to the Oxford Handbook of Neuroethics, summarizing decades of research. Neuroscientists, psychologists and other experts on thinking have very different ideas about how our brains work, but, as Levy writes: “no matter how internal processes are implemented, (you) need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (2011, 270) If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. Richard Feynman stresses it as much as Benjamin Franklin. If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and that our thoughts make sense. And if we have to write anyway, why not use our writing to build up the resources for our future publications?"
            - I'm really getting on board with the importance of writing. Can I recommend a #rocketbook? I find it liberating being able to write more often without consuming paper.
        - "Write exactly one note for each idea and write as if you were writing for someone else: Use full sentences, disclose your sources, make references and try to be as precise, clear and brief as possible. Throw away the fleeting notes from step one and put the literature notes from step two into your reference system. You can forget about them now. All that matters is going into the slip-box."
            - This must be an amazing habit to be in! Such discipline and thoroughness would surely pay off. 
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - "But with tools like the slip-box, we sometimes forget that the handling is as important as the possibilities of the tool itself. If we try to use a tool without putting any thought into the way we work with it, even the best tool would not be of much help. The slip-box, for example, would most likely be used as an archive for notes–or worse: a graveyard for thoughts (cf. Hollier 2005, 40 on Mallarmé’s index cards). Unfortunately, there are quite a few explanations of Luhmann’s technique on the Internet that focus in a misleading way on the technicalities of the slip-box. This has led to plenty of misconceptions about its abilities. But things are changing: Luhmann’s slip-box is currently the object of a long-term research project at the University of Bielefeld, and their first results have already given us a comprehensive understanding about how Luhmann really worked with it. You can look up for yourself some of his notes on their website.[ 12] Soon, you will be able to access the whole digitalised slip-box online. Add to this understanding recent psychological insights about learning, creativity and thinking, and we also get a pretty good picture why it works. And it is indeed crucially important not only to know how it works or how to work with it, but also why it works. Only then will you be able to tweak it for your own needs. And this is what this book is for: To give you all the resources you need to work in the best possible way with the best technique available. By keeping just a few basic principles in mind and with an understanding of the logic behind the file system, I see no reason why anyone should not be able to replicate Luhmann’s formula for successful learning, writing and research."
            - Woah imagine being able to access his whole digital slip-box! 
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
            - {{[[embed]]: ((((KH7w04hte))))}}
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - {{[[embed]]: ((HD0LsXloV))}}
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
            - "In order to develop a good question to write about or find the best angle for an assignment, one must already have put some thought into a topic. To be able to decide on a topic, one must already have read quite a bit and certainly not just about one topic. And the decision to read something and not something else is obviously rooted in prior understanding, and that didn’t come out of thin air, either. Every intellectual endeavour starts from an already existing preconception, which then can be transformed during further inquires and can serve as a starting point for following endeavours. Basically, that is what Hans-Georg Gadamer called the hermeneutic circle (Gadamer 2004). And even though the hermeneutic circle is regularly taught in university, writing at the same time continues to be taught as if we could start from scratch and move forward in a straight line–as if it were possible to pull a good question out of thin air and wait with the reading until the literature research is done. The seemingly pragmatic and down-to-earth-sounding advice–to decide what to write about before you start writing–is therefore either misleading or banal. It is banal if it means only that you should think before you put words on paper. It is misleading if it means that you could make a sound plan on what to write before you have immersed yourself in the topics at hand, which involves writing. It accompanies everything: We have to read with a pen in hand, develop ideas on paper and build up an ever-growing pool of externalised thoughts. We will not be guided by a blindly made-up plan picked from our unreliable brains, but by our interest, curiosity and intuition, which is formed and informed by the actual work of reading, thinking, discussing, writing and developing ideas–and is something that continuously grows and reflects our knowledge and understanding externally."
                - Scholarship occurs through writing about what we read. This is the grist; actual academic writing is built on this foundation, it can't be the "first step". 
            - "By focusing on what is interesting and keeping written track of your own intellectual development, topics, questions and arguments will emerge from the material without force. Not only does it mean that finding a topic or a research question will become easier, as we don’t have to squeeze it out of the few ideas that are on top of our head anymore, every question that emerges out of our slip-box will naturally and handily come with material to work with. If we look into our slip-box to see where clusters have built up, we not only see possible topics, but topics we have already worked on–even if we were not able to see it up front. The idea that nobody ever starts from scratch suddenly becomes very concrete. If we take it seriously and work accordingly, we literally never have to start from scratch again."
                - We've already done 'pre-thinking' on every question so some work and idea formulation is already done all the time.
            - "If something comes too early and too late at the same time, it is not possible to fix it by rearranging the order as the fictional linearity is the problem in itself. Taking smart notes is the precondition to break with the linear order. There is one reliable sign if you managed to structure your workflow according to the fact that writing is not a linear process, but a circular one: the problem of finding a topic is replaced by the problem of having too many topics to write about. Having trouble finding the right topic is a symptom of the wrong attempt to rely heavily on the limitations of the brain, not the inevitable problematic starting point, as most study guides insinuate. If you on the other hand develop your thinking in writing, open questions will become clearly visible and give you an abundance of possible topics to elaborate further in writing."
                - Writing is non-linear and the regular note-taking practice is a way of engaging in...self-dialogue?...and using this to develop ideas in conversation with other ideas. This answers questions but also identifies questions for further elaboration.
            - 
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
            - "The extraordinary successful fitness motivation coach Michelle Segar uses this dynamic to turn even the most stubborn couch potatoes into exercise aficionados (Segar, 2015). She brings those who really don’t like exercise but know they have to do it into a sustainable workout routine by focusing on one thing: Creating satisfying, repeatable experiences with sports. It doesn’t matter what her clients are doing–running, walking, team sports, gym workouts or bicycling to work. The only thing that matters is that they discover something that gives them a good experience that they would like to have again. Once her clients find something, they are encouraged enough to try something else as well. They enter the virtuous circle where willpower isn’t needed anymore because they feel like doing it anyway. If they tried to trick themselves into exercise by rewarding themselves afterwards with a relaxed evening on the sofa watching TV, it wouldn’t have taken them long until they went straight for the sofa, skipping the workout altogether, because this is how we tick."
                - This is incorrect and seems to ignore plenty of evidence about habit formation (eg the power of habit): you can form a habit by including a positive reward and eventually the habit becomes automatic and doesn't require willpower. MAYBE this doesn't apply to abstract 'thought work'. 
            - "Reading with a pen in the hand, for example, forces, us to think about what we read and check upon our understanding. It is the simplest test: We tend to think we understand what we read–until we try to rewrite it in our own words. By doing this, we not only get a better sense of our ability to understand, but also increase our ability to clearly and concisely express our understanding–which in return helps to grasp ideas more quickly. If we try to fool ourselves here and write down incomprehensible words, we will detect it in the next step when we try to turn our literature notes into permanent notes and try to connect them with others."
                - This is a good idea- reading with a pen is a creating a short-term feedback loop where we instantly test if we understand what we are reading.
                    - OMG I'm doing it right now.
            - "Our brains work not that differently in terms of interconnectedness. Psychologists used to think of the brain as a limited storage space that slowly fills up and makes it more difficult to learn late in life. But we know today that the more connected information we already have, the easier it is to learn, because new information can dock to that information. Yes, our ability to learn isolated facts is indeed limited and probably decreases with age. But if facts are not kept isolated nor learned in an isolated fashion, but hang together in a network of ideas, or “latticework of mental models” (Munger, 1994), it becomes easier to make sense of new information. That makes it easier not only to learn and remember, but also to retrieve the information later in the moment and context it is needed."
                - A beautiful idea: knowledge creates a stronger foundation for more knowledge. What is the metaphor here? Knowledge as a scaffold for more knowledge that allowl more and more scaffolding?
            - 
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - Pay focused attention.
            - Don't "multi-task"
                - "The good news is that we can train ourselves to stay focused on one thing for longer if we avoid multitasking, remove possible distractions and separate different kinds of tasks as much as possible so they will not interfere with each other. This too is not just a question of having the right mindset, but, equally important, of how we organise our workflow. A lack of structure makes it much more challenging to stay focused for extended periods of time. The slip-box provides not only a clear structure to work in, but also forces us to shift our attention consciously as we can complete tasks in reasonable time before moving on to the next one. Together with the fact that every task is accompanied by writing, which in itself requires undistracted attention, the slip-box can become a haven for our restless minds."
                    - Separate tasks and do distinct tasks one at a time (ie different kids of attention). Because each task takes less time (due to slip-box) it's easier to complete it without running out of attention.
            - "While taking on the role of a critic is not the same as being an impartial reader, it is enough to spot most of what we missed before: the holes in the argument, the parts we did not explain as we did not need to explain them to ourselves. To be able to switch between the role of critic and the role of writer requires a clear separation between these two tasks, and that becomes easier with experience. If we proofread a manuscript and don’t manage to get enough distance from ourselves as authors, we will only see our thoughts, not the actual text. It is a common issue that comes up during discussions with students: When I point out problems within the argument, an ill-defined term or just an ambiguous passage, students usually refer to what they mean first and only shift their focus to what they have written when they fully understand that what they mean is completely irrelevant within the scientific community."
                - Wow this is huge! Bad proofreaders think about what they meant to say, not what the words say - "we see our thoghts, not the actual text.". This is why it's useful to have someone else proofread; maybe it's also why I sometimes view my writing more critically after time apart. Imagine being so naive as a student to refer to your __meaning__ and not the actual writing.
            - "Letting the inner critic interfere with the author isn’t helpful, either. Here we have to focus our attention on our thoughts. If the critic constantly and prematurely interferes whenever a sentence isn’t perfect yet, we would never get anything on paper. We need to get our thoughts on paper first and improve them there, where we can look at them. Especially complex ideas are difficult to turn into a linear text in the head alone. If we try to please the critical reader instantly, our workflow would come to a standstill. We tend to call extremely slow writers, who always try to write as if for print, perfectionists. Even though it sounds like praise for extreme professionalism, it is not: A real professional would wait until it was time for proofreading, so he or she can focus on one thing at a time. While proofreading requires more focused attention, finding the right words during writing requires much more floating attention."
                - Different sorts of attention: focused attention for proofing, "floating attention" for writing. Useful to separate them; doing both at once is a form of ineffective multi-taksing.
            - "It is also easier to focus on finding the right words if we don’t have to think about the structure of the text at the same time, which is why a printed outline of the manuscript should be always in front of our eyes. We have to know what we don’t have to write about at the moment, because we know that we will take care of that in another part of our text."
                - Implicitly recommends creating the outline and printing it and having it available when doing the actual writing ie finding the right words. 
            - "Outlining or changing the outline is also a very different task that requires a very different focus on something else: not on one thought, but on the whole argument. It is important, though, to understand outlining not as the preparation of writing or even as planning, but as a separate task we need to return to throughout the writing process on a regular basis. We need a structure all the time, but as we work our way bottom-up, it is bound to change often. And whenever we need to update the structure, we need to take a step back, look at the big picture and change it accordingly."
                - Outlining is not only a discrete task but an iterative one that should be reviewed and adapted throughout the writing process.
            - 9.4 become an expert instead of a planne
                - "Similarly, no one would ever learn the art of productive academic writing just by following plans or linear, multistep prescripts–one would learn only to follow plans or prescripts. The widespread praise for planning rests on the misconception that a process like writing an academic text, which is highly dependent on cognition and thinking, can rely on conscious decision-making alone. But academic writing is an art, as well, which means it is something we can become better at with experience and deliberate practice."
                    Academic writing relies on unconscious craft and insight, not just the ideas we write about, but how we actually write in itself.!!
                - "Experts rely on embodied experience, which enables them to reach the state of virtuosity. An expert in academic writing has a feel for the process, an acquired intuition for which task will bring one closer to the finished manuscript and what is only a distraction. There can be no universally applicable rule about which step has to be taken when. Each new project is different, and at each stage of the project, it might be best to read up on something, to review a passage, to discuss an idea or to change the outline of the manuscript. There is no universal rule that could tell one upfront at which stage it wouldn’t make sense to follow up on an idea, a possible contradiction or a footnote."
                    - This is beautiful - academic writing can be thought of as a virtuoso art and the expert has a deep intuition about what is needed at each step of the process.
                        - That said I'm still confused how this relates to the process of taking better notes. 
                - Paramedic anecdote: teachers put too much emphasis on following the rules. The experts know the rules intuitively and apply them differently in each situation, using their "Gut". 
                - Guides and rigid processes aren't the pathway to excellence - instead you need to develop the capacity to natively judge situations and decide what approach to apply. (but maybe guides could still be useful for getting there?)
            - 9.5 get closure
                - "Information cannot be saved in short-term memory like on a memory stick. Rather, it kind of floats around in our heads, seeks our attention and occupies valuable mental resources until it is either forgotten, replaced by something more important (according to our brains) or moved into long-term memory. When we try to remember something, say items on a shopping list, we just keep repeating the items mentally, instead of storing them temporarily in some corner of our brains where we can pick them up later and think about something more interesting in the meantime."
                    - Information in our short-term memory isn't "written down" it is constantly cycling and taking up mental effort, like a charge stored in a capacitor maybe. 
                - "This is why it is so much easier to remember things we understand than things we don’t. It is not that we have to choose to focus either on learning or understanding. It is always about understanding–and if it is only for the sake of learning. Things we understand are connected, either through rules, theories, narratives, pure logic, mental models or explanations. And deliberately building these kinds of meaningful connections is what the slip-box is all about."
                    - When we understand something it is easier to remember it. This is because it isn't raw data in our short-term memory, it is integrated knowledge/comprehension/understanding stored more richly in the brain. interconnected with existing information. 
                - "#quote ^^Every step is accompanied by questions like: How does this fact fit into my idea of …? How can this phenomenon be explained by that theory? Are these two ideas contradictory or do they complement each other? Isn’t this argument similar to that one? Haven’t I heard this before? And above all: What does x mean for y? These questions not only increase our understanding, but facilitate learning as well. Once we make a meaningful connection to an idea or fact, it is difficult not to remember it when we think about what it is connected with.^^"
                    - Remember things by integrating them with existing knowledge.
                - "All this enables us to later pick up a task exactly where we stopped without the need to “keep in mind” that there still was something to do. That is one of the main advantages of thinking in writing–everything is externalised anyway."
                    - Always taking short-term memory items and writing them or incorporating them elsewhere, never "keeping in mind", always writing, everything is tracked.
                        - But need to be able to find the written notes!
                - "Conversely, we can use the Zeigarnik effect to our advantage by deliberately keeping unanswered questions in our mind. We can ruminate about them, even when we do something that has nothing to do with work and ideally does not require our full attention. Letting thoughts linger without focusing on them gives our brains the opportunity to deal with problems in a different, often surprisingly productive way. While we have a walk or a shower or clean the house, the brain cannot help but play around with the last unsolved problem it came across. And that is why we so often find the answer to a question in rather casual situations."
                    - Encourage 'percolation' and incidental insight by keeping an open question ticking over in the mind. 
                - 
                - 
            - 9.6 reduce the number of decisions
                - "Even though results of these studies are currently under intense scrutiny and have to be taken with a grain of salt (Carter and McCullough 2014; Engber and Cauterucci 2016; Job, Dweck and Walton 2010), it is safe to argue that a reliable and standardised working environment is less taxing on our attention, concentration and willpower, or, if you like, ego. It is well known that decision-making is one of the most tiring and wearying tasks, which is why people like Barack Obama or Bill Gates only wear two suit colours: dark blue or dark grey. This means they have one less decision to make in the morning, leaving more resources for the decisions that really matter."
                    - Reduce the number of variables or decisions: same thing every day for breakfast, same lunch, (same dinner?!?!?), same thing at the same time of day, yes, same clothes, omg yes. 
                - 
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
            - {{[[embed]]: ((((G5ZXHLRTw))))}}
                - Just copying text from the original does not enable understanding. It also strips away context, so that the quotation is no longer useful when viewed in the future. You're better off re-interpreting a quotation as you go along and possibly using it as part of the whole sentiment.
            - {{[[embed]]: ((((IiLT5pu2L))))}}
                - It is a waste of time to read without taking notes: "in terms of writing, almost as valuable as not having read at all." The purpose of reading is study (in this case) and the study isn't achieved without note-taking. 
            - "There is no secret to it and the explanation is pretty simple: Handwriting is slower and can’t be corrected as quickly as electronic notes. Because students can’t write fast enough to keep up with everything that is said in a lecture, they are forced to focus on the gist of what is being said, not the details. But to be able to note down the gist of a lecture, you have to understand it in the first place. So if you are writing by hand, you are forced to think about what you hear (or read)–otherwise you wouldn’t be able to grasp the underlying principle, the idea, the structure of an argument. Handwriting makes pure copying impossible, but instead facilitates the translation of what is said (or written) into one’s own words. The students who typed into their laptops were much quicker, which enabled them to copy the lecture more closely but circumvented actual understanding. They focused on completeness. Verbatim notes can be taken with almost no thinking, as if the words are taking a short cut from the ear to the hand, bypassing the brain."
                - Taking notes by hand forces better understanding because it is slower and thus understanding must precede the actual writing.
            - ## Keep an open mind
                - "The linear process promoted by most study guides, which insanely starts with the decision on the hypothesis or the topic to write about, is a sure-fire way to let confirmation bias run rampant. First, you basically fix your present understanding, as the outcome instead of using it as the starting point, priming yourself for one-sided perception. Then you artificially create a conflict of interest between getting things done (finding support for your preconceived argument) and generating insight, turning any departure from your preconceived plan into a mutiny against the success of your own project. This is a good rule of thumb: If insight becomes a threat to your academic or writing success, you are doing it wrong."
                    - This process depends upon 'hypothesis setting' coming later in the process, after information-gathering (which, ideally, you've already been doing natively all along).
            - 10.3 get the gist
                - "The better you become in doing this, the quicker you can jot down notes, which are still helpful. Luhmann’s notes are very condensed (Schmidt 2015). With practice comes the ability to find the right words to express something in the best possible way, which means in a simple, but not simplified way. Not only will the readers of your text appreciate your ability to explain something clearly, those you talk to will benefit from this ability as well, as it is not limited to writing. It spills over into speaking and thinking. It is proven that readers regard an author and an audience a speaker as more intelligent the more clear and to the point their expressions are (Oppenheimer 2006)."
                    - Practice at writing clear, pithy notes will make you better at writing such notes, but also a better thinker and verbal communicator. 
                        - In my mind, this is the capacity to 'think in paragraphs'
            - 10.4 learn to read
                - "This is why choosing an external system that forces us to deliberate practice and confronts us as much as possible with our lack of understanding or not-yet-learned"
                    - We have a tendency to study in ineffective ways that feel good. Instead, the 'slip box' method pushes us to continually test and refine our own understanding/learning. It does this by requiring simultaneous translation which both demonstrates and reinforces comprehension. 
            - 10.5 learn by reading
                - "It is not surprising, therefore, that the best-researched and most successful learning method is elaboration. It is very similar to what we do when we take smart notes and combine them with others, which is the opposite of mere re-viewing (Stein et al. 1984) Elaboration means nothing other than really thinking about the meaning of what we read, how it could inform different questions and topics and how it could be combined with other knowledge. In fact, “Writing for Learning” is the name of an “elaboration method” (Gunel, Hand, and Prain 2007). But there is a caveat. Even though elaboration works verifiably well for deep understanding, it might not be the best choice if you just want to learn isolated encyclopaedic facts (Rivard 1994). But as long as you are not striving for a career as a quiz show candidate, why would you want that, anyway? The slip-box takes care of storing facts and information. Thinking and understanding is what it can’t take off your shoulders, which is why it makes sense to focus on this part of the work. That it facilitates learning as well is a nice side effect. Luhmann almost never read a text twice (Hagen 1997) and was still regarded as an impressive conversation partner who seemed to have all information ready to hand.[ 30]"
                    - We learn by #elaboration. Elaboration is mindful reflection and expansion upon what we are reading, weaving it into an intellectual framework. (At the neural level, this is possibly LITERALLY creating synaptic connections in the brain). 
                - "Working with the slip-box, therefore, doesn’t mean storing information in there instead of in your head, i.e. not learning. On the contrary, it facilitates real, long-term learning. It just means not cramming isolated facts into your brain–something you probably wouldn’t want to do anyway. The objection that it takes too much time to take notes and sort them into the slip-box is therefore short-sighted. Writing, taking notes and thinking about how ideas connect is exactly the kind of elaboration that is needed to learn. Not learning from what we read because we don’t take the time to elaborate on it is the real waste of time."
                    - This has a real "Work harder not smarter" feel to it.
                - 
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
            - 11.2 Think outside the brain
                - Taking permanent notes isn't just transcribing an idea in our mind - it is forming the idea as we write, taking something inchoate from the brain and fixing it, as if pinning a butterfly to a board. Once the work of capturing the idea is done, then the work of actually engaging with and reviewing the idea can begin.
                    - "When we take permanent notes, it is much more a form of thinking within the medium of writing and in dialogue with the already existing notes within the slip-box than a protocol of preconceived ideas. Any thought of a certain complexity requires writing. Coherent arguments require the language to be fixed, and only if something is written down is it fixed enough to be discussed independently from the author. The brain alone is too eager to make us feel good–even if it is by politely ignoring inconsistencies in our thinking. Only in the written form can an argument be looked at with a certain distance–literally. We need this distance to think about an argument–otherwise the argument itself would occupy the very mental resources we need for scrutinizing it."
                - When writing permanent notes, the real question is: what does it mean? why does it matter? what are the implications? We read as a subject.
                    - "But the first question I asked myself when it came to writing the first permanent note for the slip-box was: What does this all mean for my own research and the questions I think about in my slip-box? This is just another way of asking: Why did the aspects I wrote down catch my interest?"
            - 11.3 learn by not trying
                - "We have seen in the first step that elaboration through taking smart literature notes increases the likelihood that we will remember what we read in the long term. But this was only the first step. Transferring these ideas into the network of our own thoughts, our latticework of theories, concepts and mental models in the slip-box brings our thinking to the next level. Now we elaborate these ideas within different contexts and connect them with other ideas in a durable fashion. The literature notes are going to be archived, which means the ideas would be lost in the reference system if we didn’t do something with them. That is why we transfer them into our external memory, the slip-box, with which we have an ongoing dialogue and where they can become part of our active set of ideas."
                    - Literature notes are notes but they exist outside the "latticework" of the slip-box. When we review literature notes and create permanent notes, we are weaving them in, creating links and associations. Even if the literature notes are archived, we have integrated the new information.
                - "It is difficult, if not impossible, to verify this claim, but it does make sense to shift the attention from storage strength to retrieval strength. Learning would be not so much about saving information, like on a hard disk, but about building connections and bridges between pieces of information to circumvent the inhibition mechanism in the right moment. It is about making sure that the right “cues” trigger the right memory, about how we can think strategically to remember the most useful information when we need it."
                    - We can't consciously bring information into memory (because by the time we think of it we have already remembered it). Instead, we embed the information in such a way that it will be "triggered" when we need it. We try to set up a series of cues so that the information will come to mind when appropriate. 
                - "What does help for true, useful learning is to connect a piece of information to as many meaningful contexts as possible, which is what we do when we connect our notes in the slip-box with other notes. Making these connections deliberately means building up a self-supporting network of interconnected ideas and facts that work reciprocally as cues for each other."
                    - To improve "retrieval strength", we can learn information in a way that it is linked to other relevant information and so thus the activation of that information is more likely to activate the new information also. 
                - "Stein et al. illustrate how commonsensical this is on the example of a biology novice who learns the difference between veins and arteries: “[ he] may find it difficult at first to understand and remember that arteries have thick walls, are elastic, and do not have valves, whereas veins are less elastic, have thinner walls, and have valves” (ibid.). But by elaborating a little bit on this difference and asking the right questions, like “why?” the students can connect this knowledge with prior knowledge, like their understanding of pressure and the function of the heart. Just by making the connection to the common knowledge that the heart presses the blood into the arteries, they immediately know that these walls need to sustain more pressure, which means they need to be thicker than veins, in which the blood flows back to the heart with less pressure. And, of course, this makes valves necessary to keep the blood from flowing back. Once understood, the attributes and differences are almost impossible to disentangle from the knowledge of veins and arteries."
                    - When you understand something - learn it in an integrated, holistic way, it's almost impossible to "disentangle" the knowledge. It is so captured, so...obvious...that you can't forget it. 
                        - Eg it's a lot easier to remember the scientific name of a chicken (effectively, meaningless trivia) if you have some frame for understanding what gallus means or at least what domesticus means!
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
            - "As the slip-box is not a book with just one topic, we don’t need to have an overview of it. On the contrary, we are much better off accepting as early as possible that an overview of the slip-box is as impossible as having an overview of our own thinking while we are thinking. As an extension of our own memory, the slip-box is the medium we think in, not something we think about. The note sequences are the clusters where order emerges from complexity. We extract information from different linear sources and mix it all up and shake it until new patterns emerge. Then, we form these patterns into new linear texts."
                - Order emerges organically within the slip-box over time and by the thinking that it provokes. The ordered products don't exist in the slip-box but are developed from it into written products. The slip-box itself is a place to do thinking in, not about. 
            - "Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett’s partner and vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, stresses the importance of having a broad theoretical toolbox–not to be a good academic, but to have a good, pragmatic grip on reality. He regularly explains to students which mental models have proven most useful to help him understand markets and human behaviour. He advocates looking out for the most powerful concepts in every discipline and to try to understand them so thoroughly that they become part of our thinking. The moment one starts to combine these mental models and attach one’s experiences to them, one cannot help but gain what he calls “worldly wisdom.” The importance is to have not just a few, but a broad range of mental models in your head. Otherwise, you risk becoming too attached to one or two and see only what fits them. You would become the man with a hammer who sees nails everywhere (cf. Maslow, 1966, 15)."
                - A strong theoretical toolbox provides you with a variety of mental models that you can use to understand the world around you. By drawing upon "powerful concepts" from a range of disciplines you are more likely to apply the most relevant/useful model, instead of  whatever model you happen to have to mind. This is the foundation of "wordly wisdom".
            - "His recommendations for learning read almost like instructions for the slip-box: 1. Pay attention to what you want to remember. 2. Properly encode the information you want to keep. (This includes thinking about suitable cues.) 3. Practice recall. (Ibid., 31)"
                - When reading, identify things you want to remember, record the information in some way, and then practice recalling it. 
            - "Studies on creativity with engineers show that the ability to find not only creative, but functional and working solutions for technical problems is equal to the ability to make abstractions. The better an engineer is at abstracting from a specific problem, the better and more pragmatic his solutions will be–even for the very problem he abstracted from (Gassmann and Zeschky, 2008, 103). Abstraction is also the key to analyse and compare concepts, to make analogies and to combine ideas; this is especially true when it comes to interdisciplinary work (Goldstone and Wilensky 2008)."
                - Abstraction is essential for problem-solving. It allows us to see the broader principles and ideas behind specific instances and to understand an idea (or a challenge) in a richer way. 
            - "One of the most famous figures to illustrate this skill is the mathematician Abraham Wald (Mangel and Samaniego 1984). During World War II, he was asked to help the Royal Air Force find the areas on their planes that were most often hit by bullets so they could cover them with more armour. But instead of counting the bullet holes on the returned planes, he recommended armouring the spots where none of the planes had taken any hits. The RAF forgot to take into account what was not there to see: All the planes that didn’t make it back."
                - Where should you put armour on the planes? You could look at the planes that return from dogfights and see where they were hit and put armour there. Or you could think about where these plans don't show bullet holes and put the armour there: if the planes that survived have the bulletholes, maybe being hit there isn't so bad. The 'unsampled' planes that were hit elsewhere are the ones to think about. 
                    - This is also a bit like the difference between confirming a theory vs trying to disconfirm it, ie which cards should you look behind. 
                    - We can learn as much from what didn't work as from what did work. 
                        - Maybe we should study failed managers as much as successful ones. 
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
            - 13.1 brainstorming to slip box: storming
                - "While we want to find topics that are important, interesting and can be dealt with using the material we have available, the brain prioritises ideas that are easily available in the moment. This, obviously, does not equal relevant. The brain more easily remembers information that it encountered recently, which has emotions attached to it and is lively, concrete or specific. Ideally, it rhymes as well (cf. Schacter, 2001; Schacter, Chiao and Mitchell, 2003). Everything that is rather abstract, vague, emotionally neutral or does not even sound good is far down on its list of priorities–not exactly the best criteria for an intellectual endeavour."
                    - Brainstorming is plagued by the flawed heuristics of the brain. It tends to favour ideas that are salient, more emotional, or more imagistic - not necessarily good ideas. Brainstorming also punishes abstract, vague ideas.
            - 13.2 top down to bottom up
                - "It seems counterintuitive that we become more open to new ideas the more familiar we are with ideas we have already encountered, but historians of science will happily confirm this (Rheinberger 1997). It makes sense when you think about it: without intense elaboration on what we already know, we would have trouble seeing its limitations, what is missing or possibly wrong. Being intimately familiar with something enables us to be playful with it, to modify it, to spot new and different ideas without running the risk of merely repeating old ideas believing they are new. This is why it feels in the beginning that familiarity makes it harder to come up with new ideas. We just didn’t know that most of the ideas we had are actually not that innovative. But while the belief in our own ingenuity decreases with expertise, we become more able to actually make a genuine new contribution."
                    - When we learn a new topic well, we come to understand the boundaries of the current state of knowledge. That is, we learn what has already been covered, and what are the current frontiers. Eventually this makes it easier to come up with new ideas because we have a rich understanding of the topic and areas for enquiry. 
            - 13.3 following your interests
            - 13.4 finishing and review
            - 13.5 becoming an export by giving up planning
                - "But there is one consolation: It has nothing to do with being a student. It has something to do with being human. Even the people who study this phenomenon, which is called the overconfidence bias, admit that they too fall for it (Kahneman 2013, 245ff)."
                    - People systematically underestimate how long work will take. They are overconfident and tend to automatically assume an unrealistic best case scenario. In addition, they are unrealistic about how good the best case scenario will be.
                        - In one telling experiment, students were asked to predict the time to finish a paper if (a) everything went fine, or (everything went wrong). The estimates tended to be similar. Not only that, they were all over-confident. 
                        - We can manage this by planning in terms of specific actions where we know how long it will take rather than loftier, vague ideas like "work on the project".
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
    - [[Afterword]]
- Fleeting Notes:: 
    - What are literature notes? I've forgotten the three types.
        - Notes on specific ideas in a bibliographical source.
        - short and meant to help with writing permnanent notes for the slip-box.
        - Can do them directly in zotera (ie while interacting with a pdf)
    - Add things to the slip box if they connect or add information, even if they may not support a hypothesis.
    - 10.2 keep an open mind
        - Maybe more interesting and engaging to write something that contains contradictions and un-resolved questions. 
        - "The slip-box is pretty agnostic about the content it is fed. It just prefers relevant notes. It is after reading and collecting relevant data, connecting thoughts and discussing how they fit together that it is time to draw conclusions and develop a linear structure for the argument."
            - One interesting idea is you might collect an idea in the slipbox and later turn against it but then you could update it to see why it's wong.
    - 10.3 get the ist
        - "The ability to distinguish relevant from less relevant information is another skill that can only be learned by doing. It is the practice of looking for the gist and distinguishing it from mere supporting details. As we are forced to make this distinction when we read with a pen in our hand and write permanent note after permanent note, it is more than mere practice: it is deliberate practice repeated multiple times a day. Extracting the gist of a text or an idea and giving an account in writing is for academics what daily practice on the piano is for pianists: The more often we do it and the more focused we are, the more virtuous we become."
            - Super valuable to make a habit of synthesising text insights, even just summarisng the key ideas of an article. 
        - "I suggest taking this literally. The ability to use one’s own understanding is a challenge, not a given. Luhmann stresses the importance of permanent notes in this regard: “The problem with reading academic texts seems to be that we need not the short-term memory, but the long-term memory to develop reference points for distinguishing the important things from the less important, the new information from the mere repeated. But it is of course impossible to remember everything. That would be rote learning. To put it differently: One has to read extremely selectively and extract widespread and connected references. One has to be able to follow recurrences. But how to learn it if guidance is impossible? […] Probably the best method is to take notes–not excerpts, but condensed reformulated accounts of a text. Rewriting what was already written almost automatically trains one to shift the attention towards frames, patterns and categories in the observations, or the conditions/ assumptions, which enable certain, but not other descriptions. It makes sense to always ask the question: What is not meant, what is excluded if a certain claim is made? If someone speaks of ‘human rights:’ What distinction is made? A distinction towards ‘non-human rights?’ ‘Human duties?’ Is it a cultural comparison or one with some historic people who didn’t have the concept of human rights, but lived okay together anyway? Often, the text does not give an answer or a clear answer to this question. But then one has to resort to one’s own imagination.” (Luhmann 2000, 154f)"
            - intense critical engagement with the text! Seems mentally demanding at first but I guess it becomes easier.
    - 10.4 learn to read
        - "Physicist and Nobel Prize winner Richard Feynman once said that he could only determine whether he understood something if he could give an introductory lecture on it. Reading with a pen in your hand is the small-scale equivalent of a lecture. Permanent notes, too, are directed towards an audience ignorant of the thoughts behind the text and unaware of the original context, only equipped with a general knowledge of the field. The only difference is that the audience here consists of our future selves, which will very soon have reached the same state of ignorance as someone who never had access to what we have written about. Of course, it would be helpful to involve other people at all stages of the writing process, because then we can see in their faces how well we have put something or how convincing our arguments are, but that is rather impractical."
            - As I read I should be constantly talking to people about what I'm reading . The notes are for my future self!
        - Writing forces greater intellectual clarity and rigour
            - "Also, we shouldn’t underestimate the advantages of writing. In oral presentations, we easily get away with unfounded claims. We can distract from argumentative gaps with confident gestures or drop a casual “you know what I mean” irrespective of whether we know what we meant. In writing, these manoeuvres are a little too obvious. It is easy to check a statement like: “But that is what I said!” The most important advantage of writing is that it helps us to confront ourselves when we do not understand something as well as we would like to believe."
        - Writing stuff down is a test of whether we understand
            - "While it is obvious that familiarity is not understanding, we have no chance of knowing whether we understand something or just believe we understand something until we test ourselves in some form. If we don’t try to verify our understanding during our studies, we will happily enjoy the feeling of getting smarter and more knowledgeable while in reality staying as dumb as we were. This warm feeling disappears quickly when we try to explain what we read in our own words in writing. Suddenly, we see the problem. The attempt to rephrase an argument in our own words confronts us without mercy with all the gaps in our understanding. It certainly feels less good, but this struggle is the only chance we have to improve our understanding, to learn and move forward (cf. below). This, again, is deliberate practice. Now we are faced with a clear choice: We have to choose between feeling smarter or becoming smarter. And while writing down an idea feels like a detour, extra time spent, not writing it down is the real waste of time, as it renders most of what we read as ineffectual."
        - We should learn with as little TIME as possible but maybe __not__ as little EFFORT as possible - the effort is what cements the learning (cf powerlfiter who doesn't want to work)
            - "Learning itself requires deliberate practice, and I mean actual learning that helps us to increase our understanding of the world, not just the learning that makes us pass a test. And deliberate practice is demanding; it requires effort. Trying to skip this step would be like going to the gym and trying to work out with the least effort possible. That just doesn’t make sense, just like it wouldn’t make sense to hire a coach to do the heavy lifting. A coach is not there to do the work, but to show us how to use our time and effort in the most effective way. What is self-evident in sports we are only starting to realise is true for learning as well. “The one who does the work does the learning,” writes Doyle (2008, 63). It is hard to believe, but in education that is still a revolutionary idea."
        - learning is better when it is harder - teachers break it down and make it too easy. A lot of what is frustrating or difficult in learning actually supports understanding and retention.
        - 
        - 
    - 11.2 think outside the brain
        - Putting something into our own words is the best way of understanding what we read.
    - 11.3 learn by not trying
        - old mate aleksandr romanovich luria who remembered everything but couldn't see the wood for the trees. 
        - I like the distinction between "storage strength" and "retrieval strength" it is useful. + maybe focusing on improving "retrieval strength" instead of "storage strength" ie learning infromation with more cues. 
            - "Robert and Elizabeth Ligon Bjork from the University of California suggest distinguishing between two different measurements when it comes to memory: Storage strength and retrieval strength (Bjork 2011). They speculate that storage strength, the ability to store memories, only becomes greater over one’s lifetime. We add more and more information to our long-term memory. Just by looking at the physical capacity of our brains, we can see that we could indeed probably store a lifetime and a bit of detailed experiences in it (Carey 2014, 42)."
        - Should I spend less effort learning useless trivia like geography? Maybe more effort writing permanent notes and integrating information in a meaningful way. Instead of swiping at breakfast I could be writing notes
            - That said I think I am learning the art stuff in an interesting, integrated way. 
    - ch12
        - "the slip-box is the medium we think in, not something we think about" 
        - "After adding a note to the slip-box, we need to make sure it can be found again. This is what the index is for. Luhmann wrote an index with a typewriter on index cards. In the Zettelkasten, keywords can easily be added to a note like tags and will then show up in the index. They should be chosen carefully and sparsely. Luhmann would add the number of one or two (rarely more) notes next to a keyword in the index (Schmidt 2013, 171). The reason he was so economical with notes per keyword and why we too should be very selective lies in the way the slip-box is used. Because it should not be used as an archive, where we just take out what we put in, but as a system to think with, the references between the notes are much more important than the references from the index to a single note. Focusing exclusively on the index would basically mean that we always know upfront what we are looking for–we would have to have a fully developed plan in our heads. But liberating our brains from the task of organizing the notes is the main reason we use the slip-box in the first place."
            - I don't understand this argument and why we wouldn't use more keywords. They say earlier that we want to improve ease of retrieval. This seems to contradict that.
        - "The file-box can do much more than just hand out what we request. It can surprise and remind us of long-forgotten ideas and trigger new ones. This crucial element of surprise comes into play on the level of the interconnected notes, not when we are looking for particular entries in the index. Most notes will be found through other notes. The organisation of the notes is in the network of references in the slip-box, so all we need from the index are entry points. A few wisely chosen notes are sufficient for each entry point. The quicker we get from the index to the concrete notes, the quicker we move our attention from mentally preconceived ideas towards the fact-rich level of interconnected content, where we can conduct a fact-based dialogue with the slip-box. Even though we will not get an overview of the whole slip-box (as we certainly will never get an overview of our whole internal memory), we can get an overview of a specific topic. But because the structure of topics and subtopics is not a given, but the outcome of our thinking, they too are subject to ongoing considerations and alteration. The consideration of how to structure a topic, therefore, belongs on notes as well–and not on a meta-hierarchical level. We can provide ourselves with a (temporarily valid) overview over a topic or subtopic just by making another note. If we then link from the index to such a note, we have a good entry point. If the overview on this note ceases to correctly represent the state of a cluster or topic, or we decide it should be structured differently, we can write a new note with a better structure and update the respective link from the index. This is important: Every consideration on the structure of a topic is just another consideration on a note–bound to change and dependent on the development of our understanding."
            - I like the idea of 'entry point' notes for a topic - and a good practice to synthesis the current state of knowledge.
        - "Keywords should always be assigned with an eye towards the topics you are working on or interested in, never by looking at the note in isolation. This is also why this process cannot be automated or delegated to a machine or program–it requires thinking. The Zettelkasten does make suggestions based on existing keywords and scans for keywords in the text you wrote. But it makes sense to see these suggestions more as a warning sign than an invitation to use them: these are the most obvious ideas and probably not the best ones. Good keywords are usually not already mentioned as words in the note. Assume I have the note “A sudden increase of ad-hoc theories is for Kuhn a sign that a normal-science phase might be in crisis (Kuhn 1967, 96).” A fitting keyword might be “paradigm change,” but that phrase is not in the note and therefore would not be suggested by the program."
            - Think about the keywords in the context of my interests and possible future applications.
        - ((as8uH3cEO))
            - Overview note with many links to other notes one point deeper in.
        - ((nz6pCccHL))
            - Making connections between the notes is like making neural connections - it's a thinking process, not labour. 
        - "Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett’s partner and vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, stresses the importance of having a broad theoretical toolbox–not to be a good academic, but to have a good, pragmatic grip on reality. He regularly explains to students which mental models have proven most useful to help him understand markets and human behaviour. He advocates looking out for the most powerful concepts in every discipline and to try to understand them so thoroughly that they become part of our thinking. The moment one starts to combine these mental models and attach one’s experiences to them, one cannot help but gain what he calls “worldly wisdom.” The importance is to have not just a few, but a broad range of mental models in your head. Otherwise, you risk becoming too attached to one or two and see only what fits them. You would become the man with a hammer who sees nails everywhere (cf. Maslow, 1966, 15)."
            - I love this idea of learning many powerful concepts and having them available to apply. 
        - "We learn something not only when we connect it to prior knowledge and try to understand its broader implications (elaboration), but also when we try to retrieve it at different times (spacing) in different contexts (variation), ideally with the help of chance (contextual interference) and with a deliberate effort (retrieval). The slip-box not only provides us with the opportunity to learn in this proven way, it forces us to do exactly what is recommended just by using it. We have to elaborate on what we read just to be able to write it down and translate it into different contexts. We retrieve information from the slip-box whenever we try to connect new notes with old notes. Just by doing this, we mix up contexts, shuffle notes and retrieve the information in irregular intervals. And along the way, we further elaborate on the information, which we always retrieve deliberately."
            - IE if I record a new note and think wait a second what does this relate to, then I'm also improving my recall of the other information i'm trying to think about.
                - Drawing mental connections between different things is such a powerful way of learning!
        - "Being experienced with a problem and intimately familiar with the tools and devices we work with, ideally to the point of virtuosity, is the precondition for discovering their inherent possibilities, writes Ludwik Fleck, a historian of science (Fleck 2012, 126). This is true even for purely theoretical work. Here, too, we need experience until we can “feel our way” around the problems and questions we deal with, even if these things are words, concepts and notes in a file system. What we learn in practice is always much more thorough and complex than what we could put into words. That is why even purely theoretical work cannot be reduced to explicit knowledge, which is consciously available. This is especially true for the use of a slip-box. It is the intuition that comes from the intimate knowledge of a practice that can lead us to new insights. We might not be able to explicitly state why it is more promising to follow one idea instead of another, but being experienced, we somehow know–which is enough. Experimental scientists regularly describe their decision-making process as being based on intuition (Rheinberger 1997), and there is no reason why it should be different in the social sciences. Maybe it is just harder to accept in the social sciences as we try so hard to be more like natural scientists, who seem to do without something as vague as intuition. But intuition is not the opposition to rationality and knowledge, it is rather the incorporated, practical side of our intellectual endeavours, the sedimented experience on which we build our conscious, explicit knowledge (cf. Ahrens 2014)."
            - Intuition is a real thing! It isn't a bolt from the blue, it comes out of our knowledge and rigorous learning. 
    - ch 13
        - "It makes things worse that we tend to like our first ideas the best and are very reluctant to let go of them, irrespective of their actual relevance (Strack and Mussweiler 1997). And before you now wonder if it would be a good idea to overcome the limitations of brainstorming by assembling a group of friends to brainstorm together, forget it: More people in a brainstorming group usually come up with less good ideas and restrict themselves inadvertently to a narrower range of topics (Mullen, Johnson, and Salas 1991).[ 38]"
            - bottom line: brainstorming is useless lol. 
        - "But finding the right topic to write about is mostly a problem for those who treated writing as a separate task from others, anyway–not for those of us who work with the slip-box. Those who rely on their brains will first ask themselves, then their supervisor: I read so much, but what should I write about? On the other hand, we who have already accompanied our studies by writing and collecting notes in a smart way simply don’t have the need for brainstorming anymore. We can just look into our slip-box instead. If we had a good idea before (and it is certainly more likely that we will come up with a good idea over the course of several months rather than within a couple of minutes), it will be in there. It might even already have proved itself worthy of following up on, in which case it is already connected to supporting material. It is so much easier to see what worked than to predict what might work."
            - "It is so much easier to see what worked than to predict what might work." -> a great articulation of how the slip-box works but also a principle in general for approaching problem solving. 
        - "We don’t need to worry about the question of what to write about because we have answered the question already–many times on a daily basis. Every time we read something, we make a decision on what is worth writing down and what is not. Every time we make a permanent note, we also made a decision about the aspects of a text we regarded as relevant for our longer-term thinking and relevant for the development of our ideas. We constantly make explicit how ideas and information connect with each other and turn them into literal connections between our notes. By doing this, we develop visible clusters of ideas that are now ready to be turned into manuscripts."
            - The slip-box practice separates the 'problem identification' and 'salience' parts of the writing process and makes them part of a daily practice. 
        - "If we, on the other hand, let questions arise from the slip-box, we know that they are tried and tested among dozens or even hundreds of other possible questions. The vast majority of questions might have been answered quickly or disappeared as no notes were drawn to them, either because of a lack of interest or a lack of material. This is how evolution works: by trial and error, not planning."
            - The challenge is coming up with a good question - the slip box allows you to do this. Alternatively you guess at the question and may realise TOO LATE that you chose the wrong question.
        - "If open-mindedness is all that is needed, the best artists and scientists were hobbyists. Jeremy Dean, who has written extensively on routines and rituals and suggests seeing old ways of thinking as thinking routines, puts it well when he writes that we cannot break with a certain way of thinking if we are not even aware that it is a certain way of thinking (Dean, 2013)."
            - to do things differently we need to know the normal way that we are being different from
                - I partly disagree with this! I feel like in some Mathematics at least people have done things in interesting new ways exactly because they didn't know the conventions or mainstream approaches. But I sort of see the broader point. 
        - "These findings are an important argument for academic freedom. Nothing motivates us more than seeing a project we can identify with moving forward, and nothing is more demotivating than being stuck with a project that doesn’t seem to be worth doing."
            - Motivation comes when we value the project and see it "moving forward".
        - "The risk of losing interest in what we do is high when we decide upfront on a long-term project without much clue about what to expect. We can mitigate this risk considerably by applying a flexible organisation scheme that allows us to change course whenever necessary."
            - omg every PhD ever
        - "If we accompany every step of our work with the question, “What is interesting about this?” and everything we read with the question, “What is so relevant about this that it is worth noting down?” we do not just choose information according to our interest. By elaborating on what we encounter, we also discover aspects we didn’t know anything about before and therefore develop our interests along the way. It would be quite sad if we did not change our interests during research."
            - I like these questions - also reminds me of "how to read books". 
                - What is interesting about this? What is so relevant that it is worth noting down?
        - "The ability to change the direction of our work opportunistically is a form of control that is completely different from the attempt to control the circumstances by clinging to a plan. The beginning of the research project that led to the discovery of DNA’s structure was the application for a grant. The grant was not to discover DNA’s structure, but find a treatment for cancer. If the scientists had stuck to their promises, not only would they probably not have found a cure for cancer, but they definitely would not have discovered the structure of DNA. Most likely, they would have lost interest in their work. Luckily, they did not stick to their plan, but followed their intuition and interest and took the most promising path to insight whenever one opened up. The actual research program developed along the way (Rheinberger 1997). One could say they finished the plan on what to do the very moment they finished the whole project."
            - I'm such a believer in evolving the plan opportunistically. This is a neat story. The plan evolves alongside the project and the plan is informed by the project. 
                - see: plans are useless, planning is useful. 
        - "The ability to keep control over our work and change course if necessary is made possible by the fact that the big task of “writing a text” is broken down into small, concrete tasks, which allows us practically to do exactly what is needed at a certain time and take the next step from there. It is not just about feeling in control, it is about setting up the work in a way that we really are in control. And the more control we have to steer our work towards what we consider interesting and relevant, the less willpower we have to put into getting things done. Only then can work itself become the source of motivation, which is crucial to make it sustainable."
            - Writing is more motivating because it is oriented around our own interests: we are learning as we write. This is achieved by having the flexibility to change course as we approach the work. We are in control of the journey.
        - 
- #[[Chat]]
    - #[[Art Assoiants]] Big props to you for adding references to the reading. It's ironic, but Roam **needs** a way to interconnect ideas in a usable way. Maybe metadata for a tag like year and first author? Plz.
