- Twitter:: [@lathamht](https://twitter.com/lathamht)
- LinkedIn:: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lathamturner/
- Company:: Samsara
- Favourite books:: 
    - [[When Things Fall Apart]] 
    - [[Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance]] 
    - [[The Second Mountain]]
    - [[The Alchemist]]
- Link to something you find interesting:: https://numinous.productions/ttft/ 
- Book Club 1 member? (y/n):: n 
- 
- How to Take Smart Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - write your notes here 
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - write your notes here 
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - write your notes here 
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - etc 
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
    - [[Afterword]]
- Fleeting Notes::
    - [[Introduction]] 
        - "Writing is not what follows research, learning or studying, it is the medium of all this work. And maybe that is the reason why we rarely think about this writing, the everyday writing, the note-taking and draft-making. Like breathing, it is vital to what we do, but because we do it constantly, it escapes our attention. But while even the best breathing technique would probably not make much of a difference to our writing, any improvement in the way we organise the everyday writing, how we take notes of what we encounter and what we do with them, will make all the difference for the moment we do face the blank page/ screen–or rather not, as those who take smart notes will never have the problem of a blank screen again."
            - This makes me realize how lazy I was during school where I could get away without ever writing anything down and still be as good as if not better than most of my peers.  I never had to learn to engage or think with a piece because school rewards memorization, not original thinking.  I guess it's never too late to learn, but I wish I had learned earlier.
        - "There is another reason that note-taking flies mostly under the radar: We don’t experience any immediate negative feedback if we do it badly. But without an immediate experience of failure, there is also not much demand for help. And the publishing market working how it works, there is not much help in supply for this lack of demand either. It is the panic in front of the blank screen that brings students and academic writers to turn to the bookshelves full of self-help books on writing, a market publishers meet in droves by focusing on how to deal with this horse-has-already-left-the-barn situation. If we take notes unsystematically, inefficiently or simply wrong, we might not even realise it until we are in the midst of a deadline panic and wonder why there always seem to be a few who get a lot of good writing done and still have time for a coffee every time we ask them. And even then, it is more likely that some form of rationalization will cloud the view of the actual reason, which is most likely the difference between good and bad note-taking. “Some people are just like that,” “writing has to be difficult,” “the struggle is part of the deal” are just a few of the mantras that keep too many from inquiring what exactly distinguishes successful writing strategies from less successful ones. "
            - This makes me think that those who produce the most #prolific volume of work have figured out the process of writing good notes as [[algorithms for thought]].  
        - "With that in mind, it is not surprising that the single most important indicator of academic success is not to be found in people’s heads, but in the way they do their everyday work. In fact, there is no measurable correlation between a high IQ and academic success–at least not north of 120. Yes, a certain intellectual capacity helps to get into academia, and if you struggle severely with an IQ test, it is likely that you will struggle to solve academic problems, too. But once you are in, a superior IQ will neither help you to distinguish yourself nor protect you from failure. What does make a significant difference along the whole intelligence spectrum is something else: how much self-discipline or self-control one uses to approach the tasks at hand (Duckworth and Seligman, 2005; Tangney, Baumeister, and Boone, 2004)."
            - This was never taught in school in the US.  I can remember a math teacher telling me the student she was most impressed with was the one who never showed up to school, never took any works, and still got the answers right on the test.  I even remember thinking this was aspirational as a high school student.
        - "Luckily, this is not the whole story. We know today that self-control and self-discipline have much more to do with our environment than with ourselves (cf. Thaler, 2015, ch. 2) – and the environment can be changed. Nobody needs willpower not to eat a chocolate bar when there isn’t one around. And nobody needs willpower to do something they wanted to do anyway. Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long-and short-term interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success. This is where the organisation of writing and note-taking comes into play."
            - I was surprised to realize how much self-control and self-discipline have to do with environment over self.  I would like to dig into some of the edge cases as this seems simple enough but counter to what I expected.
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - "Having a clear structure to work in is completely different from making plans about something. If you make a plan, you impose a structure on yourself; it makes you inflexible. To keep going according to plan, you have to push yourself and employ willpower. This is not only demotivating, but also unsuitable for an open-ended process like research, thinking or studying in general, where we have to adjust our next steps with every new insight, understanding or achievement–which we ideally have on a regular basis and not just as an exception. Even though planning is often at odds with the very idea of research and learning, it is the mantra of most study guides and self-help books on academic writing. How do you plan for insight, which, by definition, cannot be anticipated? It is a huge misunderstanding that the only alternative to planning is aimless messing around. The challenge is to structure one’s workflow in a way that insight and new ideas can become the driving forces that push us forward. We do not want to make ourselves dependent on a plan that is threatened by the unexpected, like a new idea, discovery–or insight."
            - Our workflow needs to be both repeatable and #anti-fragile.  I've never been able to stick to a workflow for long enough to really see an unlock, and I think a lot of that is because I get stuck and don't want to put in the effort to unlock it or I become reactive to my environment and the workflow is not able to keep up.  [[Roam]] feels like a good way to stop that, but still to be confirmed
                - I think this is the point he is trying to address with {{alias:((ez0DqkFlC))Routines require simple, repeatable tasks that can become automatic and fit together seamlessly}}
        - "Thankfully, we don’t have to choose between usability and usefulness. Quite the contrary. The best way to deal with complexity is to keep things as simple as possible and to follow a few basic principles. The simplicity of the structure allows complexity to build up where we want it: on the content level. There is quite extensive empirical and logical research on this phenomenon (for an overview: cf. Sull and Eisenhardt, 2015). Taking smart notes is as simple as it gets."
            - The best solutions often are simple and elegant.  I'm reminded of Einstein's quote to make things as simple as possible, but never any simpler.
        - "The importance of an overarching workflow is the great insight of [[David Allen]]’s “Getting Things Done” (Allen, 2001). There are few serious knowledge workers left who haven’t heard of “GTD” and that is for a good reason: It works. The principle of [[GTD]] is to collect everything that needs to be taken care of in one place and process it in a standardised way. This doesn’t necessarily mean that we actually do everything we once intended to do, but it forces us to make clear choices and regularly check if our tasks still fit into the bigger picture. Only if we know that everything is taken care of, from the important to the trivial, can we let go and focus on what is right in front of us. Only if nothing else is lingering in our working memory and taking up valuable mental resources can we experience what Allen calls a “mind like water”-the state where we can focus on the work right in front of us without getting distracted by competing thoughts. The principle is simple but holistic. It is not a quick fix or a fancy tool. It doesn’t do the work for you. But it does provide a structure for our everyday work that deals with the fact that most distractions do not come so much from our environment, but our own minds."
            - We need to be able to get rid of mental clutter to actually focus on ideas and the interconnectedness of what we're reading and learning.  We can't do that if we're constantly thinking about bills or our next task or worrying about something else.
        - "People still search for Luhmann’s “secret,” putting down his remarkable output to him being a genius or even thinking they only need his slip-box and they would be set. Sure, you need to be smart to be successful in academia and writing, but if you don’t have an external system to think in and organise your thoughts, ideas and collected facts, or have no idea how to embed it in your overarching daily routines, the disadvantage is so enormous that it just can’t be compensated by a high IQ."
            - It's ironic that we fetish high IQ when it actually delays us from realizing the need to learn to think in an external system.  Said another way, I got away with so much lazy work because I could hold the complexity of it all in my own head, even today, and the modern workforce has so little true complexity in it that I don't need to think in an external system to be good at my job.
        - "He usually wrote his notes with an eye towards already existing notes in the slip-box. And while the notes on the literature were brief, he wrote them with great care, not much different from his style in the final manuscript: in full sentences and with explicit references to the literature from which he drew his material. More often than not, a new note would directly follow up on another note and would become part of a longer chain of notes. He then would add references to notes somewhere else in the slip-box, some of them which were located nearby, others in completely different areas and contexts. Some were directly related and read more like comments, others contained not-so-obvious connections. Rarely would a note stay in isolation."
            - How does a note go from a fleeting note to a slip-box note? What makes a good slip-box note? #questions
            - How does he maintain the #reference when it really is built up from multiple places rather than just copied from a direct source? In other words, at what point did it stop becoming important where the idea was sparked from and mattered more how he made it his own? Or did it? #questions
            - This sounds a lot like the basic underlying concepts in [[Evergreen Notes]] around [[atomic idea]] and richly [[linked references]] 
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - "Granted, writing these notes is the main work. It will take enormous amounts of effort, time, patience and willpower, and you will probably break under the weight of this task. Just kidding. It is the easiest part of all. Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). ^^Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head.^^ ^^“Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible,”^^ neuroscientist Neil Levy concludes in the introduction to the Oxford Handbook of Neuroethics, summarizing decades of research. Neuroscientists, psychologists and other experts on thinking have very different ideas about how our brains work, but, as Levy writes: “no matter how internal processes are implemented, (you) need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (2011, 270) If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. Richard Feynman stresses it as much as Benjamin Franklin. If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and that our thoughts make sense. And if we have to write anyway, why not use our writing to build up the resources for our future publications? [*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))"
            - It's interesting that writing is taught in school as a way to convey information you've already thought about (or summarize information someone else has thought about), but in reality writing is how you think.
        - "5. Develop your topics, questions and research projects bottom up from within the system. See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. Even if you don’t have anything in your slip-box yet, you never start from scratch–you already have ideas on your mind to be tested, opinions to be challenged and questions to be answered. Do not brainstorm for a topic. Look into the slip-box instead to see where chains of notes have developed and ideas have been built up to clusters. Don’t cling to an idea if another, more promising one gains momentum. The more you become interested in something, the more you will read and think about it, the more notes you will collect and the more likely it is that you will generate questions from it. It might be exactly what you were interested in from the beginning, but it is more likely that your interests will have changed–that is what insight does."
            - It would be interesting to chronicle the path insight follows in people and see how far away from their original idea their final project landed. 
        - "In truth, it is highly unlikely that every text you read will contain exactly the information you looked for and nothing else. Otherwise, you must have already known what was in there and wouldn’t have had reason to read it in the first place.[ 7] As the only way to find out if something is worth reading is by reading it (even just bits of it), it makes sense to use the time spent in the best possible way. We constantly encounter interesting ideas along the way and only a fraction of them are useful for the particular paper we started reading it for. Why let them go to waste? Make a note and add it to your slip-box. It improves it. Every idea adds to what can become a critical mass that turns a mere collection of ideas into an idea-generator."
            - If you're collecting interesting ideas, how do you avoid having hanging notes that don't relate to anything?  #questions
            - This seems at the extreme to run the risk of being a collector of information rather than an active participant in cultivating knowledge.
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - "That is why the slip-box is not introduced as another technique, but as a crucial element in an overarching workflow that is stripped of everything that could distract from what is important. Good tools do not add features and more options to what we already have, but help to reduce distractions from the main work, which here is thinking. The slip-box provides an external scaffold to think in and helps with those tasks our brains are not very good at, most of all objective storage of information."
            - Real improvement is often achieved through a process of subtraction rather than adding anything new.  
            - We don't need yet another complicated tool or technique, what we need is a simple workflow that we can stick to.  If you can't stick to it, the most perfect system won't accomplish anything. 
    - My experience of schooling 100% aligned with when [[Sönke Ahrens]] says{{alias:((rfxlhKub4))the written work represents a preceded performance, namely learning, understanding, and the ability to analyse other texts critically.  In this mindset, the writing of a paper is just another skill to be learned.}} I think if I had learned how to do this, I would have been much more engaged with the process of learning, rather than showing off that I was smart without having done any work.  I wanted to be engaged in truly groundbreaking learning, but I never could do it.
    - Random observation, the process of reading on topics before choosing a research question to write about has an interesting parallel to university where you often are forced to choose your major before you know anything about the different majors.  I think this is what gen-ed requirements are designed to solve for but they are often skipped or pushed aside.
    - I can clearly see the parallels between the ideas in "In the old system, the question is: Under which topic do I store this note? In the new system, the question is: In which context will I want to stumble upon it again? Most students sort their material by topic or even by seminars and semester. From the perspective of someone who writes, that makes as much sense as sorting your errands by purchase date and the store they were bought from. Can’t find your trousers? Maybe they are with the bleach you bought the same day at your department store." and the basic premises of [[Roam]].  The point about stumbling upon notes reminds me of Michael Neielsen's statement that all cards in [[anki]] should be placed in one deck to let ideas collide with each other.
    - What are examples where great insights or the seminal works of science were developed by people who followed the guidance that {{alias:((kvk3dCa8w))We have to read with a pen in hand, develop ideas on paper and build up an ever-growing pool of externalized thoughts.}}?  Are there relevant conflicting examples also?  [[Andy Matuschak]] has an interesting point that the best thinkers he knows don't take notes.
        - I think this research may answer that: {{alias:((sT8GoIPxY))Oshin Vartanian compared and analysed the daily workflows of Nobel Prize winners and other eminent scientists and concluded that it is not a relentless focus, but flexible focus that distinguishes them. “Specifically, the problem-solving behavior of eminent scientists can alternate between extraordinary levels of focus on specific concepts and playful exploration of ideas. This suggests that successful problem solving may be a function of flexible strategy application in relation to task demands.” (Vartanian 2009, 57)}}
    - The idea of "A good workflow can easily turn into a virtuous circle, where the positive experience motivates us to take on the next task with ease, which helps us to get better at what we are doing, which in return makes it more likely for us to enjoy the work, and so on. But if we feel constantly stuck in our work, we will become demotivated and much more likely to procrastinate, leaving us with fewer positive or even bad experiences like missed deadlines. We might end up in a vicious circle of failure (cf. Fishbach, Eyal and Finkelstein, 2010)." sounds a lot like #flow state
    - I think this is the first time I've seen the concept of {{alias:((wG9XnpzPM))different kinds of attention}}.  That's a new concept to me.  I'm curious what other kinds of attention there are besides the ones he lists [[Floating attention]], [[Sustained attention]], and [[Focused attention]].
    - I wish he would have gone deeper on different techniques for switching roles when he says "Proofreading, for example, is obviously part of the writing process, but requires a very different state of mind than the attempt to find the right words. When we proofread a manuscript, we take on the role of a critic who takes a step back to see the text with the eyes of a dispassionate reader. We scan the text for typos, try to smooth out patches and check structure. We deliberately put distance between ourselves and the text to see what is really on the paper, not just in our heads. We try to block out the knowledge of what we meant to say to be able to see what we wrote.".  For instance, one technique that's worked well for reading technical papers is to read from back to front to notice paragraphs or sentences that don't make sense.  What can you build into your workflow to support those different roles?
    - I love the concept of having separate tasks for [[Outlining]] and [[Writing]] that don't necessarily follow one after the other but allow you to see the #meta and then zoom in on the details.  Whether I get the focus right, the #mindset of switching between the two tasks in defined chunks in an iterative loop expands my thoughts about how to write.
    - I feel there is some context I'm missing when he says "Experts rely on embodied experience, which enables them to reach the state of virtuosity. An expert in academic writing has a feel for the process, an acquired intuition for which task will bring one closer to the finished manuscript and what is only a distraction. There can be no universally applicable rule about which step has to be taken when. Each new project is different, and at each stage of the project, it might be best to read up on something, to review a passage, to discuss an idea or to change the outline of the manuscript. There is no universal rule that could tell one upfront at which stage it wouldn’t make sense to follow up on an idea, a possible contradiction or a footnote.".  This feels like a rather extreme viewpoint which would imply there is no transferable learning that can occur and be taken forward in projects.  It seems like he's concerned about rigid adherence to a pre-defined plan and in reaction decreeing that planning can never be a useful exercise.  
        - The parallel I have here is the argument about [[Waterfall]] vs [[Agile]] methodologies in software development.  Taken to the extreme, both have negative consequences, but even someone who attains the skills to be a [[ performer]] should know better than to rigidly adhere to any system.
        - Said another way true #mastery is the embodiment of #fluidity and #flexibility in technique and execution, but not the outright rejection of any of those.
    - Are there situations in which contradicting examples exist to "Because trainees lack the experience to judge a situation correctly and confidently, they need to stick to the rules they were taught, much to the delight of their teachers. According to the Dreyfuses, the correct application of teachable rules enables you to become a competent “performer” (which corresponds to a “3” on their five-grade expert scale), but it won’t make you a “master” (level 4) and certainly won’t turn you into an “expert” (level 5)."? For instance, when flying an airliner, it seems like becoming a master is all about knowing the right teachable rule to apply to the right situation, not about developing new rules.  But I could be overly constraining the example in my own mind.
    - "The first step is to break down the amorphous task of “writing” into smaller pieces of different tasks that can be finished in one go. The second step is to make sure we always write down the outcome of our thinking, including possible connections to further inquiries. As the outcome of each task is written down and possible connections become visible, it is easy to pick up the work any time where we left it without having to keep it in mind all the time. [22] Possible subsequent tasks are open questions or connections to other notes, which we could elaborate on further or not. It also comes up in explicit reminders like “review this chapter and check for redundancies,” which belong into the project folder. Or the third option is the simple fact that something is still in our in-box waiting to be turned into a permanent note–a quick and not-yet–crossed-out note in our notebook, or literature notes not yet archived in our reference system." makes me realize I need to put a little more thought into my own #workflow.  Specifically, the limitations I see with my own workflow are that I don't have a good system to move ideas from my writing inbox into [[Permanent Note]] and I don't have a way to distinguish the different stages of [[Literature Notes]], those that are still hanging and those that have been #Archive.
    - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
        - "The extraordinary successful fitness motivation coach Michelle Segar uses this dynamic to turn even the most stubborn couch potatoes into exercise aficionados (Segar, 2015). She brings those who really don’t like exercise but know they have to do it into a sustainable workout routine by focusing on one thing: Creating satisfying, repeatable experiences with sports. It doesn’t matter what her clients are doing–running, walking, team sports, gym workouts or bicycling to work. The only thing that matters is that they discover something that gives them a good experience that they would like to have again. Once her clients find something, they are encouraged enough to try something else as well. They enter the virtuous circle where willpower isn’t needed anymore because they feel like doing it anyway. If they tried to trick themselves into exercise by rewarding themselves afterwards with a relaxed evening on the sofa watching TV, it wouldn’t have taken them long until they went straight for the sofa, skipping the workout altogether, because this is how we tick."
            - Would an equivalent for work be something akin to receiving praise or validation for a rough draft output or some insight? This is starting to feel like many of the growth hacking tricks social media growth teams have used that are so maligned right now.  But if those same tricks are used for a personally motivating (or maybe even personally chosen) purpose, would they still be viewed as negatively?
        - "Following a circular approach, on the other hand, allows you to implement many feedback loops, which give you the chance to improve your work while you are working on it. It is not just about increasing the number of opportunities to learn, but also to be able to correct the mistakes we inevitably make. As the feedback loops are usually smaller than one big chunk of feedback at the end, they are also much less scary and easier to embrace."
            - It seems to me this is a great [[self-reinforcing positive feedback loop]] for the clarity of your ideas, but maybe not such a great feedback look for the quality of those ideas.  Does clarity always correlate with quality and vice-versa?
        - "The ability to express understanding in one’s own words is a fundamental competency for everyone who writes–and only by doing it with the chance of realizing our lack of understanding can we become better at it. But the better we become, the easier and quicker we can make notes, which again increases the number of learning experiences. The same applies to the crucial ability to distinguish the important bits of a text from the less important ones: the better we become at it, the more effective our reading will become, the more we can read, the more we will learn. We will enter a beautiful, virtuous circle of competency. You cannot help but feel motivated by it."
            - This seems like an underlying core motivation for the book as a whole.
    - #Question: What are the possible ways to improve [[Ego Depletion]] through training? 
        - If I want to pursue this question, I should start with [[Baumeister et al., 1998, 1253]]
    - I am amazed at how motivating it is building up a #habit of returning to fleeting and literature notes on a regular basis is.  Even if it's just to capture them from my journal and Kindle into [[Roam]], building up that [[positive momentum]] helps so much.  In the past when trying to wait until after I'd finished the book, I either lost context or it felt so overwhelming as to be a chore.  And then knowing that there will be a critical mass of other notes to relate to keeps it exciting as well. 
    - I found it really insightful to recognize that our future self who reads our [[Permanent Note]] will be just as ignorant of the details of the text as our past self who has not read the text at all.  
        - #Question does memorizing a text (like a poem) change the way you write [[Permanent Note]] about it? Does it add any depth to your future reading of it?
    - Memorization without #understanding is lying to ourselves and understanding without some memorization of specific details is impossible.  Why then are we only taught to memorize in school, but never to confront our own understanding? {{alias:((gPZsuV0dj))Understanding is not just a precondition to learning something. To a certain degree, learning is understanding.}} {{alias:((gPZsuV0dj))The mere-exposure effect would fool us here, too: Seeing something we have seen before causes the same emotional reaction as if we had been able to retrieve the information from our memory.}}
    - One technique to implement {{alias:((x8xsQz6Ns))read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches}} is to prepare to read a book by taking out a blank piece of paper and writing down everything you know about a book and everything you're hoping to learn by reading it before you start. A technique I learned from [[Farnam Street]]
    - While I've been inspired in the past by {{alias:((8_XJr9Hvr))write at least 250 words every 15 minutes. This, he writes in his autobiography: “allowed me to produce over ten pages of an ordinary novel volume a day, and if kept up through ten months, would have given as its results three novels of three volumes each in the year”}}, it's even more inspiring to discover a thinking equivalent of {{alias:((3O4hcpRVY))Putting notes into the slip-box, however, is like investing and reaping the rewards of compounded interest }}.  This reminds me of [[Andy Matuschak]]'s observation that the output of #[[Knowledge workers]] is the number of [[Evergreen Notes]] they create.
    - #Question Are [[Literature notes]] summarizing the text and [[Permanent Note]] your interpretation of that summary? If that's true, I've been doing my [[Literature notes]] wrong.  I'm also not sure that all of my [[Literature notes]] are worth creating [[Permanent Note]] from.  I wonder if that means I'm not being selective enough in what I turn into [[Literature notes]] or if that's expected.
    - If the [[slip-box]] is a form of [[external scaffolding]] for non-fiction writing and [[research]], are there similar scaffolding systems for #Art or #[[Fiction ]] writing?
    - The #context for creating [[Permanent Notes]] from [[Literature notes]] is to wonder, investigate, and ask questions about why the [[Literature notes]] caught you #interest in the first place.  I'm reminded of how many people are actually numb to their own interests.  This is a problem I struggled with for a long time.  It was really only after reading [[Awareness]] and [[The Artist's Way]] that I started to reconnect with my own #Interests
    - #Chat [[Latham Turner]] Implementing the #zettelkasten in [[Roam]]
        - When using Roam, do you number notes? Is there any value in numbering notes in sequence beyond the requirement of being able to find the sequence in a physical system that does not have the benefit of hyperlinks?
    - The obvious connections to [[Charlie Munger]] in the author's idea of learning as building a latticework of #[[Mental model]] makes sense.  I like how he connects the Mental model frameowrk to the idea of a [[virtuous circle]] where learning facilitates learning.  Almost like the [[flywheel]] so popular in tech startups.
- Literature Notes::
    - The different types of notes you take serve different purposes.  [[Fleeting Notes]] are useful for capturing random ideas that pop into your head and are really just reminders of what you're thinking.  [[Literature Notes]] are for capturing things you know you will need. [[Permanent Notes]] are the output of both [[Fleeting Notes]] and [[Literature Notes]] and are the tool for making connections and finding ideas.
        - Source:: "1. Make fleeting notes. Always have something at hand to write with to capture every idea that pops into your mind. Don’t worry too much about how you write it down or what you write it on. These are fleeting notes, mere reminders of what is in your head. They should not cause any distraction. Put them into one place, which you define as your inbox, and process them later. I usually have a simple notebook with me, but I am happy with napkins or receipts if nothing else is at hand. Sometimes I leave a voice record on my phone. If your thoughts are already sorted and you have the time, you can skip this step and write your idea directly down as a proper, permanent note for your slip-box." and "2. Make literature notes. Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use in your own thinking or writing. Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. Be extra selective with quotes–don’t copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place–your reference system."
        - Question::
            - When do [[Fleeting Notes]] become [[Literature Notes]] or do they?
                - I think [[Fleeting Notes]] will get translated into [[Permanent Notes]] if they end up seeming important rather than becoming [[Literature Notes]].  The process of conversion is the process of thinking, confirming or disconfirming, and understanding.
                    - Source: "1. You need something to capture ideas whenever and wherever they pop into your head. Whatever you use, it should not require any thoughts, attention or multiple steps to write it down. It can be a notebook, a napkin, an app on your phone or iPad. These notes are not meant to be stored permanently. They will be deleted or chucked soon anyway. They only function as a reminder of a thought and are not meant to capture the thought itself, which requires time to phrase proper sentences and check facts. I recommend having pen and paper with you at all times. It is really hard to beat a notebook in its simplicity. If you use other tools, make sure everything ends up in one place, a central inbox or something like that, where you can process it soon, ideally within a day."
            - How do you decide which of your notes get converted into [[Permanent Notes]] and which never become anything? 
            - What do you do with [[Fleeting Notes]] which you aren't sure are ready to be [[Permanent Notes]] but you're not sure you want to delete either?
            - How have people implemented a [[Reference System]] in [[Roam]] in addition to a slip-box system? #Chat
        - [[Literature Notes]] must display understanding, not copying.  They need to be thought about enough to be translated into your own words. 
            - Source:: {{alias:((0Bo86a-RU))Rewriting what was already written almost automatically trains one to shift the attention towards frames, patterns and categories in the observations, or the conditions/ assumptions, which enable certain, but not other descriptions. It makes sense to always ask the question: What is not meant, what is excluded if a certain claim is made? If someone speaks of ‘human rights:’ What distinction is made? A distinction towards ‘non-human rights?’ ‘Human duties?’ Is it a cultural comparison or one with some historic people who didn’t have the concept of human rights, but lived okay together anyway? Often, the text does not give an answer or a clear answer to this question. But then one has to resort to one’s own imagination.” (Luhmann 2000, 154f)}} 
        - [[Permanent Notes]] should be an [[atomic idea]], and should allow you to trace your path back to how you came upon them as well as forward to what came after them.
        - For so many years I though copying and underlying was making [[Fleeting Notes]], but this book club has made me realize it was not really taking notes at all.  I was simply highlighting things with my brain off rather than engaging.  Even [[Fleeting Notes]] need to be something I write on my own.
    - [[Writing]] is so important that we should design our entire workflow to be good at it, as if our professional lives depended on it.  This doesn't mean you need to write rather than [[Read]], attend lectures, [[Discussion]], etc. or at the expense of the #quality of your other wok.  It can't be separated from doing any of those things, and only when we learn to write well will we learn to get the best out of those other activities.
        - Source::
            - "School is different. Pupils are usually not encouraged to follow their own learning paths, question and discuss everything the teacher is teaching and move on to another topic if something does not promise to generate interesting insight. The teacher is there for the pupils to learn. But, as Wilhelm von Humboldt, founder of the Humboldt University of Berlin and brother to the great explorer Alexander von Humboldt, put it, the professor is not there for the student and the student not for the professor. Both are only there for the truth. And truth is always a public matter. Everything within the university aims at some kind of publication. A written piece does not necessarily need to be accepted in an international journal to become public. In fact, the vast majority of what is written and discussed is not published in this narrow sense. The review process itself is a form of presenting an idea publicly to the peers and so is everything a student hands over to a professor or lecturer. Even the handout for a presentation discussed with fellow students is a written piece made public. It is public because in the discussion, it does not matter anymore what the author meant, only what is there in writing. The moment the author can be removed from the scene, the written piece is a public claim on truth. The criteria for a convincing argument are always the same, regardless of who the author is or the status of the publisher: They have to be coherent and based on facts. Truth does not belong to anyone; it is the outcome of the scientific exchange of written ideas. This is why the presentation and the production of knowledge cannot be separated, but are rather two sides of the same coin (Peters and Schäfer 2006, 9). "
            - "Working as if nothing else counts than writing does not mean spending more time writing at the expense of everything else. Only if we compartmentalise our work into different, isolated tasks will it seem like focusing on writing reduces the time we spend on other tasks. But it does not mean to read less, for this is the main source of the writing material. It doesn’t mean to attend fewer lectures or seminars, because they provide you with the ideas to write about and questions worth answering. Attending lectures is also one of the best ways to get an idea about the current state of research, not to mention the ability to ask and discuss questions. Focusing on writing also doesn’t mean to stop giving presentations or finding other ways of making your thoughts public. Where else could you get feedback for your ideas?"
            - "Focusing on writing as if nothing else counts does not necessarily mean you should do everything else less well, but it certainly makes you do everything else differently. Having a clear, tangible purpose when you attend a lecture, discussion or seminar will make you more engaged and sharpen your focus. You will not waste your time with the attempt to figure out what you “should” learn. Rather, you will try to learn as efficiently as possible so you can quickly get to the point where actual open questions arise, as these are the only questions worth writing about. You quickly learn to distinguish good-sounding arguments from actual good ones, as you will have to think them through whenever you try to write them down and connect them with your previous knowledge. It will change the way you read as well: You will become more focused on the most relevant aspects, knowing that you cannot write down everything. You will read in a more engaged way, because you cannot rephrase anything in your own words if you don’t understand what it is about. By doing this, you will elaborate on the meaning, which will make it much more likely that you will remember it. You also have to think beyond the things you read, because you need to turn it into something new. And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. Deliberate practice is the only serious way of becoming better at what we are doing (cf. Anders Ericsson, 2008). If you change your mind about the importance of writing, you will also change your mind about everything else. Even if you decide never to write a single line of a manuscript, you will improve your reading, thinking and other intellectual skills just by doing everything as if nothing counts other than writing."
        - This is the difference between passive consumption and true engagement in every activity we undertake.  
    - The process of creating something new, whether that be writing or art or anything else, is akin to living an explorer's lifestyle.  It's rarely linear, but instead wanders as your interests change.  It follows from where your ideas cluster rather than trying to fit within a preconceived notion.
        - Source:: "But those who have already developed their thinking through writing can keep the focus on what is interesting for them at the moment and accumulate substantial material just by doing what they most feel like doing. The material will cluster around the questions they returned to most often, so they don’t risk too far of a departure from their interest. If your first chosen topic turns out to be not as interesting, you will just move on and your notes will cluster around something else. Maybe you will even note down the reasons why the first question is not interesting and turn that into an insight valuable enough to make public. When it finally comes to the decision on what to write about, you will already have made the decision–because you made it on every single step along the way, again and again every day, improving it gradually. Instead of spending your time worrying about finding the right topic, you will spend your time actually working on your already existing interests and doing what is necessary to make informed decisions–reading, thinking and writing. By doing the work, you can trust that interesting questions will emerge. You might not know where you will end up (and you don’t need to), but you can’t force insight into a preconceived direction anyway. You minimise both the risk of losing interest in a topic you have once chosen ill-informed and the risk of having to start all over again."
        - Is this more of a permanent note than a literature note?
    - When we think of attention, that has always meant focused attention.  But attention means many different kinds, including [[Focused attention]], [[Floating attention]], [[Sustained attention]], [[conscious attention]], and [[Flow]] state.  Accomplishing any great creative work requires the ability to move between these different kinds of attention when the task requires it.
        - Source::
            - "Usually, when we think about attention, we only think about focused attention–something that requires willpower to sustain. This is not too surprising, because this is what most psychologists, philosophers and neuroscientists used to have in mind when they talked about attention (Bruya 2010, 5). Today, research differentiates between multiple forms of attention. Ever since Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi in the 1970s described “flow,” the state in which being highly focused becomes effortless (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975),[ 18] other forms of attention, which are much less dependent on will and effort, attracted researchers’ interest."
            - "When it comes to focused attention, we focus on one thing only, something we can sustain for only a few seconds. The maximum duration of focused attention seems not to have changed over time (Doyle and Zakrajsek 2013, 91). Focused attention is different from “sustained attention,” which we need to stay focused on one task for a longer period and is necessary to learn, understand or get something done. This is the kind of attention that is most certainly under threat from an increase in distractions. The average duration seems to have shrunken quite considerably over time–we practice much less focused attention than we used to (ibid)."
        - #Question
            - What other types of attention are there?
            - Do we need to train the different types of attention differently?
            - Does our environment or our workflow need to change to support the different kinds of attention?
    - The processes of outlining and writing are equally important but for different reasons.  Outlining allows you to play with the bigger picture of the piece; writing allows you to go deep into the details.  The two different tasks need to be interwoven at different points within the creating process.
        - Source::"Outlining or changing the outline is also a very different task that requires a very different focus on something else: not on one thought, but on the whole argument. It is important, though, to understand outlining not as the preparation of writing or even as planning, but as a separate task we need to return to throughout the writing process on a regular basis. We need a structure all the time, but as we work our way bottom-up, it is bound to change often. And whenever we need to update the structure, we need to take a step back, look at the big picture and change it accordingly."
        - Question::
            - What tools do people use to outline? 
    - Truly mastering the creative process seems to be about being able to fluidly switch between maintaining a mind that is open to anything, curious, and playful and one that is deeply focused on analysis and application.
        - Source:: "These studies help to solve a puzzle that has bothered psychologists who study creative people as well. “On one hand, those with wandering, defocused, childlike minds seem to be the most creative; on the other, it seems to be analysis and application that’s important. The answer to this conundrum is that creative people need both … The key to creativity is being able to switch between a wide-open, playful mind and a narrow analytical frame.” (Dean, 2013, 152)"
    - Our brains capacity to remember something is orders of magnitude greater when we understand something than when we don't.  Rather than having to remember every detail, our understanding allows us to batch the details into chunks that are easy for us to remember.  And when we actually understand what we're learning, we connect those items to things we already know and ask related questions that deepen our learning and facilitate recall when we think about the connected items.
        - Source::
            - "This is why it is so much easier to remember things we understand than things we don’t. It is not that we have to choose to focus either on learning or understanding. It is always about understanding–and if it is only for the sake of learning. Things we understand are connected, either through rules, theories, narratives, pure logic, mental models or explanations. And deliberately building these kinds of meaningful connections is what the slip-box is all about."
            - "#quote ^^Every step is accompanied by questions like: How does this fact fit into my idea of …? How can this phenomenon be explained by that theory? Are these two ideas contradictory or do they complement each other? Isn’t this argument similar to that one? Haven’t I heard this before? And above all: What does x mean for y? These questions not only increase our understanding, but facilitate learning as well. Once we make a meaningful connection to an idea or fact, it is difficult not to remember it when we think about what it is connected with.^^"
    - To focus on thinking and learning, we need to be able to clear our mind completely and confidently.  That means we must trust that our process will not allow us to forget anything so that we can devote 100% of our attention to the task at hand.  And then we need our workflow to be strong enough to actually capture all that, by breaking down large tasks into bite-sized items and capturing all relevant outcomes, questions, or connections to other items.  That also provides us a starting point to immediately jup right back in next time.
        - Source::
            - "Zeigarnik successfully reproduced what is now known as the Zeigarnik effect: Open tasks tend to occupy our short-term memory–until they are done. That is why we get so easily distracted by thoughts of unfinished tasks, regardless of their importance. But thanks to Zeigarnik’s follow-up research, we also know that we don’t actually have to finish tasks to convince our brains to stop thinking about them. All we have to do is to write them down in a way that convinces us that it will be taken care of. That’s right: The brain doesn't distinguish between an actual finished task and one that is postponed by taking a note. By writing something down, we literally get it out of our heads. This is why David Allen’s “Getting things done” system works: The secret to have a “mind like water” is to get all the little stuff out of our short-term memory. And as we can’t take care of everything once and for all right now, the only way to do that is to have a reliable external system in place where we can keep all our nagging thoughts about the many things that need to be done and trust that they will not be lost."
            - "And the same is true for the work with the slip-box. To be able to focus on the task at hand, we have to make sure other, unfinished tasks are not lingering in our head and wasting precious mental resources."
            - "The first step is to break down the amorphous task of “writing” into smaller pieces of different tasks that can be finished in one go. The second step is to make sure we always write down the outcome of our thinking, including possible connections to further inquiries. As the outcome of each task is written down and possible connections become visible, it is easy to pick up the work any time where we left it without having to keep it in mind all the time. [22] Possible subsequent tasks are open questions or connections to other notes, which we could elaborate on further or not. It also comes up in explicit reminders like “review this chapter and check for redundancies,” which belong into the project folder. Or the third option is the simple fact that something is still in our in-box waiting to be turned into a permanent note–a quick and not-yet–crossed-out note in our notebook, or literature notes not yet archived in our reference system."
    - When [[experts]] rely on #intuition or #[[Gut feeling]], it's the result of having run their [[knowledge]] through feedback loops in multiple, varied situations, and learning from the outcomes of those situations.  They have deeply routed the context of that knowledge.
        - Source:: "Experts, on the other hand, have internalised the necessary knowledge so they don’t have to actively remember rules or think consciously about their choices. They have acquired enough experience in various situations to be able to rely on their intuition to know what to do in which kind of situation. Their decisions in complex situations are explicitly not made by long rational-analytical considerations, but rather come from the gut (cf. Gigerenzer, 2008a, 2008b)."
    - Knowledge is a skill which requires deliberate practice just like any other skill.  That deliberate practice involves asking questions of the text, looking for patterns or connections, and identifying other contexts in which the author's point may carry over or may not hold up, all done through [[Smart Notes]].
        - Source:: "The ability to spot patterns, to question the frames used and detect the distinctions made by others, is the precondition to thinking critically and looking behind the assertions of a text or a talk. Being able to re-frame questions, assertions and information is even more important than having an extensive knowledge, because without this ability, we wouldn’t be able to put our knowledge to use. The good news is that these skills can be learned. But it requires deliberate practice (Ericsson, Krampe, and Tesch-Römer 1993; Anders Ericsson 2008). Taking smart notes is the deliberate practice of these skills. Mere reading, underlining sentences and hoping to remember the content is not."
    - Writing is how we pressure test our own understanding.  If we're unable to write an idea concisely, we likely don't understand it nearly as well as we think.
        - Source:: "Also, we shouldn’t underestimate the advantages of writing. In oral presentations, we easily get away with unfounded claims. We can distract from argumentative gaps with confident gestures or drop a casual “you know what I mean” irrespective of whether we know what we meant. In writing, these manoeuvres are a little too obvious. It is easy to check a statement like: “But that is what I said!” The most important advantage of writing is that it helps us to confront ourselves when we do not understand something as well as we would like to believe."
    - The measurement of productivity for developing knowledge could be number of notes written per day.  This allows you to quickly identify your progress against a goal and see tangible results.
        - Source:: 
            - "If you, by any chance, don’t have the ambition to compete with him in terms of books per year, you could settle for three notes a day and still build up a significant critical mass of ideas in a very reasonable time. And you could settle for less than one book every twelve months. In contrast to manuscript pages per day, a certain number of notes a day is a reasonable goal for academic writing. And that is because taking a note and sorting it into the slip-box can be done in one go, while writing a manuscript page could involve weeks and months of preparation involving other tasks as well. You could therefore measure your daily productivity by the number of notes written."
            - "If we instead set out to write, say, three notes on a specific day, review one paragraph we wrote the day before or check all the literature we discovered in an article, we know exactly at the end of the day what we were able to accomplish and can adjust our expectations for the next day. Getting hundreds of these cases of feedback over the course of a year will make us much more likely to learn from them and to become more realistic about our productivity than if we just miss a deadline once in a while, which, of course, will not happen again–until next time."
        - This seems to be a very similar concept to [[Andy Matuschak]]'s assertion that the measure of [[Knowledge workers]] is the number of [[Evergreen Notes]] created.  I would imagine the two closely influenced each other.
    - Modern scientific knowledge indicates that truly novel and insightful thinking requires a support systems outside of the brain itself.  The optimal conditions for the brain to explore new ideas must be present, and these conditions require what the author refers to as external scaffolding.
        - Source:: "Philosophers, neuroscientists, educators and psychologists like to disagree in many different aspects on how the brain works. But they no longer disagree when it comes to the need for external scaffolding. Almost all agree nowadays that real thinking requires some kind of externalization, especially in the form of writing. “Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible” is one of the key takeaways in a contemporary handbook of neuroscientists (Levy 2011, 290) Concluding the discussions in this book, Levy writes: “In any case, no matter how internal processes are implemented, insofar as thinkers are genuinely concerned with what enables human beings to perform the spectacular intellectual feats exhibited in science and other areas of systematic enquiry, as well as in the arts, they need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (Ibid.) In our system, the scaffolding is done explicitly by connecting the thoughts within the external memory of the slip-box. Luhmann writes: “Somehow one has to mark differences, keep track of distinctions, either explicitly or implicitly in concepts,” because only if the connections are somehow fixed externally can they function as models or theories to give meaning and continuity for further thinking (Luhmann, 1992, 53)."
    - Deep learning requires making connections across information, across sources, and especially across domains.  We can only really learn when we throw out ordered topics and the need for instant recall and we embrace disorder, with the messy variations, edge cases, and contrasting viewpoints that entails.
        - Source:: "Writing notes and sorting them into the slip-box is nothing other than an attempt to understand the wider meaning of something. The slip-box forces us to ask numerous elaborating questions: What does it mean? How does it connect to … ? What is the difference between … ? What is it similar to? That the slip-box is not sorted by topics is the precondition for actively building connections between notes. Connections can be made between heterogeneous notes–as long as the connection makes sense. This is the best antidote to the impeding way most information is given to us in our learning institutions. Most often, it comes in modular form, sorted by topic, separated by disciplines and generally isolated from other information. The slip-box is forcing us to do the exact opposite: To elaborate, to understand, to connect and therefore to learn seriously." "The fact that too much order can impede learning has become more and more known (Carey 2014). Conversely, we know that the deliberate creation of variations and contrasts can facilitate learning. Nate Kornell and Bjork showed this when they experimentally taught students different art styles. First, they used the traditional approach of showing students one art style at a time using different paintings. Then, they deliberately mixed up the styles and shuffled the paintings around. The students who were presented paintings from different styles in no particular order learned to distinguish styles faster and were also much more successful at matching paintings to styles and artists they had never seen before. This shows that elaborating on the differences and similarities of notes instead of sorting them by topic not only facilitates learning, but facilitates the ability to categorise and create sensible classifications!"
    - When making [[Permanent Notes]] discoverable, we need to design [[entry point]]s into our thoughts that allow us to see connections between notes and follow our own thinking.  We are not creating a perfectly ordered system, but intentionally adding some friction such that we can probe the depths of our own understanding.
        - Source::
            - "After adding a note to the slip-box, we need to make sure it can be found again. This is what the index is for. Luhmann wrote an index with a typewriter on index cards. In the Zettelkasten, keywords can easily be added to a note like tags and will then show up in the index. They should be chosen carefully and sparsely. Luhmann would add the number of one or two (rarely more) notes next to a keyword in the index (Schmidt 2013, 171). The reason he was so economical with notes per keyword and why we too should be very selective lies in the way the slip-box is used. Because it should not be used as an archive, where we just take out what we put in, but as a system to think with, the references between the notes are much more important than the references from the index to a single note. Focusing exclusively on the index would basically mean that we always know upfront what we are looking for–we would have to have a fully developed plan in our heads. But liberating our brains from the task of organizing the notes is the main reason we use the slip-box in the first place."
            - "The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it? The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference."
    - Finding good topics to write about is the process of looking through your [[slip-box]] and seeing where clusters of [[Permanent notes]] have built up.  Then using those notes to outline your ideas into concrete tasks and identify areas that still need work.
        - "Since writing is nothing more than the revision of a rough draft, which is nothing more than turning a series of notes into a continuous text, which are written on a day-to-day basis, connected and indexed in the slip-box, there is no need to worry about finding a topic to write about. Just look into your slip-box and see where clusters have been built up. These clusters are what caught your interest again and again, so you already know that you have found material to work with. Now you can spread out these notes on your desktop or use the outliner of the Zettelkasten, outline your argument and construct a preliminary order of sections, chapters or paragraphs. This will make questions, which are not answered, obvious, and it will show the gaps in the argument that need to be filled and make visible which parts still need some work."
    - Bottoms up innovation is the process of collecting information from your interests, following those threads wherever they may lead, and letting the notes you take as you learn guide you.  Only once you have enough notes to truly understand what we're learning and thinking do we define a plan for what to write about or investigate.
        - Source:: "The process is self-reinforcing. A visibly developed cluster attracts more ideas and provides more possible connections, which in return influence our choices on what to read and think further. They become signposts for our daily work and orient us to what is worth thinking about. Topics grow bottom up and gain traction along the way. As soon as the slip-box has grown a bit, we can replace our thoughts on what is interesting and what we think is relevant with a pragmatic look into the slip-box, where we can plainly see what truly proved to be interesting and where we found material to work with."
    - Related to the idea of bottoms-up innovation, the [[slip-box]] is a way of seeing themes between differing projects as well as giving us the confidence to work on different projects at the same time. Our work on multiple projects starts building upon each other as we develop a theme among a few different works.
        - Source:: "Another key point: Try working on different manuscripts at the same time. While the slip-box is already helpful to get one project done, its real strength comes into play when we start working on multiple projects at the same time. The slip-box is in some way what the chemical industry calls “verbund.” This is a setup in which the inevitable by-product of one production line becomes the resource for another, which again produces by-products that can be used in other processes and so on, until a network of production lines becomes so efficiently intertwined that there is no chance of an isolated factory competing with it anymore."
    -  
- [[Book Club Live Session 1]]
    - [[Goals for Book Club]]
        - I'd like to gain confidence in my own use of the Zettling method.  In other words, to know that I'm getting the most out of my efforts and not missing something.
        - Build out a solid workflow for myself for going forward
        - Get to know more users of RR
        - Long term goal: I'd love to some day support myself doing independent research and doing long form writing or knowledge capture.  By the end of this book club, it would be useful to have a refined workflow to start that effort.
