- Name:: 
- Website:: www.apus.edu
- Company:: American Public University System
- Book Club 2:: Ahrens, Sönke. 2017. How to Take Smart Notes. CreateSpace.
- Schedule:: 
    - [Session 1 Nov 1, 2020 | 1.5 hours](https://us02web.zoom.us/rec/play/zYfGrF-AHTDstjL-KcNgFdoYNFNJjedhpNEiRO6vE0Bsqfsn8RhhfmW1hwxRWbvdPcoZ7CodDAvKmXCI.kqj_pJiskYQhSKCY?continueMode=true)
    - Session 2 Nov 8, 2020 |
    - Session 3 Nov 15, 2020 |
    - 
- [[Book Club Live Session 1]]
    - [[Goals for Book Club]]
        - Refine the note-taking process by fully implementing Ahrens (2017) and reinvigorating my daily writing practice. I want to transition to taking daily notes within the Roam system while also continuing to use #Zotero for literature/biblio note-taking. 
        - Enhance writing productivity in a low-stress manner while at the same time engaging in a new writing community of like-minded individuals looking forward to also enhancing their own work through the use of #Roam.
            - At the same time of enhancing my writing practice I can continue to work on my own reading habit to furthermy overall research practice.
        - Another added benefit of the book club will be to learn how to use #Roam more efficiently and effectively. In this manner I can begin to make better use of the technology.
            - In learning the technology I can further assist my students and colleagues by promoting a tool that could help them with their own writing practice.
                - As opposed to simply presenting on Ahren's (2017) work at student residencies I could also perhaps demo #Roam as a possible note taking option given their academic discount.
- [[Book Club Live Session 2]]
    - [[Graph Meditation]]
        - At first, I experienced some confusion on if the goal was to write collaboratively or to not link out to the main book itself.
        - Everyone seems to be falling into their own groove.
        - The help and exchange of ideas in the chat is really great to see.
    - "~template 🧩: 11.8.20 report-back from small group"
        - Breakout Group Number - 7
            - Who was in this group on 11.8.20::
                - [[Nicole Drumhiller]] :)
                - [[Rodulfo Prieto]]
                - [[Chinarut]]
                - [[Ashish Bhateja]]
                - Lukas Donkers
                - [[Lukas Donkers]]
                - [[Maj]]
                - [[Eric Bundonis]]
                - [[Darin Flynn]]
                - [[Conor O'Brien]]
                - [[Lisa Benson]]
                - [[Matt Brockwell]]
            - Any struggles or challenges identified?:: 
            - Anything you are excited about?::
                - I know I'm excited about tossing my fleeting notes - [[Nicole Drumhiller]]
            - Does the concept of a "Fleeting Note" make sense to you?::
                - Seems like this was a yes for the group
            - **Group 7 Notes**
                - Not so much a struggle but it was interesting to see the different processing styles between those in academia and how they interpret the note-taking workflow and those not. Those outside of academia seemed to combine fleeting notes with literature notes whereas those in academia discussed a different process..
                - Some recognized that they were only ever taking fleeting notes but not moving past that.  There was little deeper meaning to the associated note or people forgot why they took that note.
                - The book is very text focused. You can have audio comments that can be just as valuable.
                - One thing to consider is that you can get lost in the note-taking component when the goal is to transform notes into some kind of published work that is to be consumed by someone else.
                - "Extensional Bootstrapping" - overtime the build-up of knowledge that leads to something substantial.
- 
- Ahrens (2017) Note Types::
    - Fleeting Notes are random thoughts that come to mind
        - To be thrown away after converting into permanent notes.
    - Literature Notes are notes about book contents. Work to write them in your own words use direct quotes sparingly and store in #Zotero
    - Permanent notes are those notes that are in your own words that move fleeting notes and lit notes forward in a manner that can be applied to your own work/reearch.
        - Write in complete sentences, reference sources, be clear and brief.
- Permanent Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
        - The beauty of the smart notes system is that it draws from the philosophy that you already have something to say about whatever project you are looking to start which therefore promotes the notion that you really can write from the first day of your project/manuscript idea (Ahrens 2017). #Zettel
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - "Complexity is an issue, though. Even if you don’t aim to develop a grand theory and just want to keep track of what you read, organise your notes and develop your thoughts, you will have to deal with an increasingly complex body of content, especially because it is not just about collecting thoughts, but about making connections and sparking new ideas. Most people try to reduce complexity by separating what they have into smaller stacks, piles or separate folders. They sort their notes by topics and sub-topics, which makes it look less complex, but quickly becomes very complicated. Plus, it reduces the likelihood of building and finding surprising connections between the notes themselves, which means a trade-off between its usability and usefulness."
            - Typically when trying to establish a [[Daily writing practice]] they overcomplicate the way in which they carry it out resulting in false starts, tech overload, and lost ideas. Like with all methods, consistency is key in making effective use of the [[Smart Notes]] system (Ahrens 2017). Additional insight into Luhmann's slip-box method is provided by breaking it into a [[Smart Notes]] system that recognizes the different kinds of notes and the different values or weights they carry to move one's ideas forward efficiently. This breakdown creates an "overarching workflow" that is simple, replicable, and sustainable over time. 
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - "Granted, writing these notes is the main work. It will take enormous amounts of effort, time, patience and willpower, and you will probably break under the weight of this task. Just kidding. It is the easiest part of all. Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head. “Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible,” neuroscientist Neil Levy concludes in the introduction to the Oxford Handbook of Neuroethics, summarizing decades of research. Neuroscientists, psychologists and other experts on thinking have very different ideas about how our brains work, but, as Levy writes: “no matter how internal processes are implemented, (you) need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (2011, 270) If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. Richard Feynman stresses it as much as Benjamin Franklin. If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and that our thoughts make sense. And if we have to write anyway, why not use our writing to build up the resources for our future publications?"
            - "If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and our thoughts make sense" (Ahrens 2017, 23).
                - Only by writing something in our own words do we truly comprehend what is being said and are able to carry it forward and communicate it to others (Ahrens 2017).  Through this translation process, we can then begin to apply the information to our own work and projects in new ways. 
        - "1. Make fleeting notes. Always have something at hand to write with to capture every idea that pops into your mind. Don’t worry too much about how you write it down or what you write it on. These are fleeting notes, mere reminders of what is in your head. They should not cause any distraction. Put them into one place, which you define as your inbox, and process them later. I usually have a simple notebook with me, but I am happy with napkins or receipts if nothing else is at hand. Sometimes I leave a voice record on my phone. If your thoughts are already sorted and you have the time, you can skip this step and write your idea directly down as a proper, permanent note for your slip-box."
            - Using the [[Smart Notes]] method can be broken down into a series of steps. It first begins by creating "fleeting" notes or writing down random or misc thoughts that you have on a project or topic idea (for me these often appear on post-it notes or bar napkins) (Ahrens 2017). 
        - "2. Make literature notes. Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use in your own thinking or writing. Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. Be extra selective with quotes–don’t copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place–your reference system."
            - Next comes the generation of "literature notes" which can be likened to highlighting and making notations in books or articles on a specific topic relevant to the project at hand.  Here (Ahrens 2017) reinforces the need to translate the ideas into one's own words to enhance recall and also to solidify learning. These kinds of notes include bibliographic information about the source itself for attribution purposes and are considered separate from fleeting notes or "permanent notes." Ahrens (2017) indicates that literature notes should be kept with bibliographic information and recommends the use of something like #Zotero.
        - "3. Make permanent notes. Now turn to your slip-box. Go through the notes you made in step one or two (ideally once a day and before you forget what you meant) and think about how they relate to what is relevant for your own research, thinking or interests. This can soon be done by looking into the slip-box–it only contains what interests you anyway. The idea is not to collect, but to develop ideas, arguments and discussions. Does the new information contradict, correct, support or add to what you already have (in the slip-box or on your mind)? Can you combine ideas to generate something new? What questions are triggered by them?"
            - Permanent notes can be thought of as a transformative interpretation of fleeting notes and literature notes. In this manner, a note taken in one's own words is created in a manner so that it can be related to one's own research or interests (Ahrens 2017). Along these lines to help students and faculty struggling with their own writing practice introducing the [[Smart Notes]] system can help them enhance their own [[Daily writing practice]]. From here fleeting notes can be discarded as they are now transformed into permanent notes and the literature notes can be saved separately from the permanent notes for later use.
        - "5. Develop your topics, questions and research projects bottom up from within the system. See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. Even if you don’t have anything in your slip-box yet, you never start from scratch–you already have ideas on your mind to be tested, opinions to be challenged and questions to be answered. Do not brainstorm for a topic. Look into the slip-box instead to see where chains of notes have developed and ideas have been built up to clusters. Don’t cling to an idea if another, more promising one gains momentum. The more you become interested in something, the more you will read and think about it, the more notes you will collect and the more likely it is that you will generate questions from it. It might be exactly what you were interested in from the beginning, but it is more likely that your interests will have changed–that is what insight does."
            - "6. After a while, you will have developed ideas far enough to decide on a topic to write about. Your topic is now based on what you have, not based on an unfounded idea about what the literature you are about to read might provide. Look through the connections and collect all the relevant notes on this topic (most of the relevant notes will already be in partial order), copy them onto your “desktop”[ 6] and bring them in order. Look for what is missing and what is redundant. Don’t wait until you have everything together. Rather, try ideas out and give yourself enough time to go back to reading and note-taking to improve your ideas, arguments and their structure. "
            - In steps, 5-6 Ahrens (2017) discusses that writers can then be in a better position to develop their research ideas and question by drawing from the content saved within the permanent notes system. Overtime then, people can develop their ideas and make an informed decision on what interests them the most about the content material they have absorbed and developed ideas about, turn their notes on the subject matter into a rough draft, and then finally edit their work into a complete manuscript (Ahrens 2017). 
        - "7. Turn your notes into a rough draft. Don’t simply copy your notes into a manuscript. Translate them into something coherent and embed them into the context of your argument while you build your argument out of the notes at the same time. Detect holes in your argument, fill them or change your argument."
            - From here one should be able to run a report (if using an automated system) to compile the notes taken and craft a manuscript (MS) outline.  If working with a solid project framework in mind, Gray's (2015, 2019) [[Publish and Flourish]] guidance on crafting an outline from key sentences will help ensure the MS is organized in a manner that flows properly.
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - "We need four tools: · Something to write with and something to write on (pen and paper will do) · A reference management system (the best programs are free) · The slip-box (the best program is free) · An editor (whatever works best for you: very good ones are free) More is unnecessary, less is impossible."
            - To carry out the [[Smart Notes]] system you basically need a few key items that can be used consistently. These include something to write with/on, a way to manage the different kinds of notes, and a writing editor of some sort.  Ahrens (2017) reinforces that the best products out there for this are typically free and shouldn't come at a great cost to the user, something especially important for students and faculty. In my own writing practice tools used include pen and paper, or writing/dictating directly into a GoogleDoc or Google Keep (can be used easily across systems)for note-taking and #Zotero for bibliographic information and literature notes. The permanent notes system is a bit more tricky as [Zkn3] and [Obsidian], while free, are not easily used across systems, and #Roam while effective and used across systems, does come at a cost. For an editing product Microsoft Word, GoogleDocs, and #Scrivner are especially helpful especially when coupled with #Grammarly. 
                - Essentially for writers and academics, finding a reliable and cost-effective tool that can be used as a #Zettelkasten or slip-box will ultimately be a game-changer in their [[Daily writing practice]].
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - "(Getting the tools ready shouldn’t have taken more than 5-10 minutes. But having the right tools is only one part of the equation. It is easy to get fooled by their simplicity. Many “tried them out” without really understanding how to work with them and were expectedly disappointed with the results. Tools are only as good as your ability to work with them. Everybody knows how to handle a flute (you blow into one end and press your fingers on the holes according to the notes you are playing), but nobody would try it out once and then judge the instrument on what they hear.)"
            - Essentially the tools used in ones [[Daily writing practice]] should not overcomplicate your workflow. The tools should be something that can be sustained over time without the fear of what happens if a system is retired or no longer updated. 
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
            - "This book is based on another assumption: Studying does not prepare students for independent research. It is independent research. Nobody starts from scratch and everybody is already able to think for themselves. Studying, done properly, is research, because it is about gaining insight that cannot be anticipated and will be shared within the scientific community under public scrutiny. There is no such thing as private knowledge in academia. An idea kept private is as good as one you never had. And a fact no one can reproduce is no fact at all. Making something public always means to write it down so it can be read. There is no such thing as a history of unwritten ideas."
                - Often academics, students, and researchers can get caught up in life's day-to-day activities that are required of them but have little utility in moving their [[Daily writing practice]] forward. The guidance by Ahrens (2017) to write like nothing else matters is similar to the guidance on making writing time a priority (Jenson 2017; Goodson 2017; Belcher 2019; Gray 2015, 2019). Some writers and academics often fall into the mindset trap that they need to read in order to write, however, Tara Gray's (2015, 2019) [[Publish and Flourish]] book attempts to move the writer into a mindset of writing in order to read. In this regard, the writer internalizes the guidance on writing informally from the first day of the project (Gray 2015; 2019), or through the use of fleeting notes (Ahrens 2017) to kick start their project. Then from here, one can leave clues on where the work needs to go next (like looking up opposing arguments, digging deeper into detail on certain subjects, finding sources to support the work), ultimately flipping the mindset to write to read or as in Ahrens (2017), writing because nothing else matters. 
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - "Even though the slip-box, being organised bottom-up, does not face the trade-off problem between too many or too few topics, it too can lose its value when notes are added to it indiscriminately. It can only play out its strengths when we aim for a critical mass, which depends not only on the number of notes, but also their quality and the way they are handled."
                - Finding an easy system that can be used regularly is really the key component to enhancing one's [[writing practice]] (Ahrens 2017). Overcomplicating the system is a surefire way to make writing cumbersome and ineffective. When this happens people fall back into those negative practices of "binge" writing because it has allowed them to achieve moderate success up to that point.  While some can achieve success with that kind of practice, studies have shown that people who write daily (even for just 15-30 minutes a day) end up producing more than three times the written and published work than people who binge wrote from project to project (Gray and Birch 2001; Gray 2015, 2019).  
            - "What all these category-confusing approaches have in common is that the benefit of note-taking decreases with the number of notes you keep. More notes will make it more difficult to retrieve the right ones and bring related ones together in a playful way. But it should be just the opposite: The more you learn and collect, the more beneficial your notes should become, the more ideas can mingle and give birth to new ones–and the easier it should be to write an intelligent text with less effort."
                - The more notes you take doesn't equal better. Saving everything can instead become burdensome with information overload (Ahrens 2017). Instead deliberate notes should be created to enhance the development of ideas.
            - "When you close the folder for your current project in the evening and nothing is left on your desk other than pen and paper, you know that you have achieved a clear separation between fleeting, permanent and project-related notes."
                - A sign of a job well done is to leave your desk in the evening with a clean desk space, knowing that you are ready to propel your [[Daily writing practice]] forward into the next day.
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
            - "But those who have already developed their thinking through writing can keep the focus on what is interesting for them at the moment and accumulate substantial material just by doing what they most feel like doing. The material will cluster around the questions they returned to most often, so they don’t risk too far of a departure from their interest. If your first chosen topic turns out to be not as interesting, you will just move on and your notes will cluster around something else. Maybe you will even note down the reasons why the first question is not interesting and turn that into an insight valuable enough to make public. When it finally comes to the decision on what to write about, you will already have made the decision–because you made it on every single step along the way, again and again every day, improving it gradually. Instead of spending your time worrying about finding the right topic, you will spend your time actually working on your already existing interests and doing what is necessary to make informed decisions–reading, thinking and writing. By doing the work, you can trust that interesting questions will emerge. You might not know where you will end up (and you don’t need to), but you can’t force insight into a preconceived direction anyway. You minimise both the risk of losing interest in a topic you have once chosen ill-informed and the risk of having to start all over again."
                - If you have an idea about something, chances are you already have some kind of opinion on the matter. An idea is all that it takes. From that first fleeting note, you can work to develop a complete manuscript over time (Ahrens 2017). The ultimate trick is to get your random ideas and thoughts down on paper whether it be through handwriting, typing, or even dictating.  Setting aside chunks of time to write is often ineffective since these chunks get overtaken with other tasks that take away from writing. For this reason, even just a brief dictation session while out walking the dog can help propel an idea forward, even if you haven't done much research into it yet. The thing to remember is that these early fleeting notes are our own (Ahrens 2017), no one needs to see them. From there we can create what Anne Lamott (2015) has coined "shitty first drafts," (SFDs) or early drafts of work that are no one's business but our own. From here these SFDs can be transformed into works of written art. 
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]  
            - "Any attempts to trick ourselves into work with external rewards (like doing something nice after finishing a chapter) are only short-term solutions with no prospect of establishing a positive feedback loop. These are very fragile motivational constructions. Only if the work itself becomes rewarding can the dynamic of motivation and reward become self-sustainable and propel the whole process forward (DePasque and Tricomi, 2015)."
                - The momentum created by developing a [[Daily writing practice]] using the [[Smart Notes]] system can serve as a positive reward as the writer begins to see the writing come pouring out onto the page (Ahrens 2017; Gray 2015; 2019). Making small progress each day helps move a person out of a binge writing practice into something much more fulfilling which ultimately can transform writing from a daunting practice into something enjoyable. 
            - "Reading with a pen in the hand, for example, forces, us to think about what we read and check upon our understanding. It is the simplest test: We tend to think we understand what we read–until we try to rewrite it in our own words. By doing this, we not only get a better sense of our ability to understand, but also increase our ability to clearly and concisely express our understanding–which in return helps to grasp ideas more quickly. If we try to fool ourselves here and write down incomprehensible words, we will detect it in the next step when we try to turn our literature notes into permanent notes and try to connect them with others."
                - You need to write out your thoughts on ideas and re-write direct quotes in your own words to fully ensure understanding (Ahrens 2017, 54).
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
            - "The most reliable predictor of our behaviour in the immediate future is–surprise, surprise–the intention to do it. If we decide to go to the gym now, the chance is that we really do go to the gym now. But this is, unfortunately, only true for the very immediate future. When it comes to the long run, researchers struggle to find any measurable connection between our intentions and our actual behaviour (Ji and Wood 2007; Neal et al. 2012). There is one exception, though: we most certainly act according to our intention if we happen to intend to do exactly what we used to do before."
                - This echo's Belcher's (2019) and Gray's (2019) guidance on the need to develop a daily writing practice that can be maintained overtime. Binge writing in large blocks can have a negative impact on writer productivity. Supporting this studies have shown that faculty who write for at least (15-) 30 minutes a day end up producing almost three times the articles by comparison to those that binge write (Gray and Birch 2001).
    - [[Afterword]]
- Fleeting Notes:: 
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - On page 28 Ahrens (2017) provides a good example of a Keep it Simple and Straightforward (KISS) story [[Fleeting Notes]]
- [[Book Prompts]]
    - "“The ability to express understanding in one’s own words is a fundamental competency for everyone who writes – and only by doing it with the chance of realizing our lack of understanding can we become better at it. But the better we become, the easier and quicker we can make notes, which again increases the number of learning experiences. The same applies to the crucial ability to distinguish the important bits of a text from the less important ones: the better we become at it, the more effective our reading will become, the more we can read, the more we will learn. We will enter a beautiful, virtuous circle of competency. You cannot help but feel motivated by it.” [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]] [*]([[Beau Haan 📌]])"
        - For everything you read, you need to translate it into your own word to ensure that you have fully taken the information in, understand it, and can communicate it to others.
- [[Roam Tips]]
    - Adding an (external) Link: highlight any existing words and turn them into a **link** by typing CMD-K (Ctrl-K).
