- Name:: Nico Macdonald 
- Website:: [spy.co.uk](http://www.spy.co.uk/biography/)
- Company:: [London South Bank University](https://www.lsbu.ac.uk/)
- Location:: [[London, UK]]
- Literature Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
        - ^^Writing is not what follows research, learning or studying, it is the medium of all this work^^. And maybe that is the reason why we rarely think about this writing, the everyday writing, the note-taking and draft-making. Like breathing, it is vital to what we do, but because we do it constantly, it escapes our attention. But while even the best breathing technique would probably not make much of a difference to our writing, ^^any improvement in the way we organise the everyday writing^^, how we take notes of what we encounter and what we do with them, ^^will make all the difference for the moment we do face the blank page/ screen^^–or rather not, as those who take smart notes will never have the problem of a blank screen again. [*](((NOUeE9wbB)))
        - There is another reason that note-taking flies mostly under the radar: ^^We don’t experience any immediate negative feedback if we do it badly^^. But without an immediate experience of failure, there is also not much demand for help. And the publishing market working how it works, there is not much help in supply for this lack of demand either. It is the panic in front of the blank screen that brings students and academic writers to turn to the bookshelves full of self-help books on writing, a market publishers meet in droves by focusing on how to deal with this horse-has-already-left-the-barn situation. If we take notes unsystematically, inefficiently or simply wrong, we might not even realise it until we are in the midst of a deadline panic and wonder why there always seem to be a few who get a lot of good writing done and still have time for a coffee every time we ask them. And even then, it is more likely that some form of rationalization will cloud the view of the actual reason, which is most likely the difference between good and bad note-taking. “Some people are just like that,” “writing has to be difficult,” “the struggle is part of the deal” are just a few of the mantras that keep too many from inquiring what exactly distinguishes successful writing strategies from less successful ones.  [*](((1NqxVWlvh)))
        - Luckily, this is not the whole story. We know today that self-control and self-discipline have much more to do with our environment than with ourselves (cf. Thaler, 2015, ch. 2) – and the environment can be changed. Nobody needs willpower not to eat a chocolate bar when there isn’t one around. And nobody needs willpower to do something they wanted to do anyway. Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long-and short-term interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. ^^Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success^^. This is where the organisation of writing and note-taking comes into play. [*](((tIetkYe5Q)))
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - ^^A good structure is something you can trust^^. It relieves you from the burden of remembering and keeping track of everything. If you can trust the system, you can let go of the attempt to hold everything together in your head and you can start focusing on what is ((important: The content, the argument and the ideas. By breaking down the amorphous task of “writing a paper” into small and clearly separated tasks)), you can focus on one thing at a time, complete each in one go and move on to the next one (Chapter 3.1). ^^A good structure enables flow^^, the state in which you get so completely immersed in your work that you lose track of time and can just keep on going as the work becomes effortless (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Something like that does not happen by chance. [*](((N9B8GYzJr)))
        - "1.1 Good Solutions are Simple – and Unexpected:"
            - "That is why we need a note-taking system that is as comprehensive as GTD, but one that is suitable for the open-ended process of writing, learning and thinking. Enter the slip-box."
            - "After collecting notes for a while in the way most people do, commenting in the margins of a text or collecting handwritten notes by topic, Luhmann realised his note-taking was not leading anywhere. So he turned note-taking on its head. Instead of adding notes to existing categories or the respective texts, he wrote them all on small pieces of paper, put a number in the corner and collected them in one place: the slip-box."
        - "1.2 The Slip-box:"
            - Now that you know how the slip-box works, you only need to understand how to work with it. And the best way to understand this is to understand a little bit about the way we think, learn and develop ideas. And if I were forced to boil it down to a single bullet point, it would be this: ^^We need a reliable and simple external structure to think in that compensates for the limitations of our brains^^. But first, let me guide you through the process of writing a paper with the slip-box. [*](((kVuIQFmCg)))
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - Granted, writing these notes is the main work. It will take enormous amounts of effort, time, patience and willpower, and you will probably break under the weight of this task. Just kidding. It is the easiest part of all. Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head. “Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible,” neuroscientist Neil Levy concludes in the introduction to the Oxford Handbook of Neuroethics, summarizing decades of research. Neuroscientists, psychologists and other experts on thinking have very different ideas about how our brains work, but, as Levy writes: “no matter how internal processes are implemented, (you) need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (2011, 270) If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. ^^Richard Feynman stresses it as much as Benjamin Franklin^^. If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and that our thoughts make sense. And if we have to write anyway, why not use our writing to build up the resources for our future publications? [*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))
        - "2.1 Writing a paper step by step:"
            - 1. ^^Make fleeting notes^^. Always have something at hand to write with to capture every idea that pops into your mind. Don’t worry too much about how you write it down or what you write it on. These are fleeting notes, mere ^^reminders of what is in your head^^. They should not cause any distraction. ^^Put them into one place, which you define as your inbox^^, and process them later. I usually have a simple notebook with me, but I am happy with napkins or receipts if nothing else is at hand. ^^Sometimes I leave a voice record on my phone^^. If your thoughts are already sorted and you have the time, you can skip this step and write your idea directly down as a proper, permanent not for your slip-box. [*](((pZ1dkTn5N)))
            - 2. Make literature notes. Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use in your own thinking or writing. ^^Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words^^. Be extra selective with quotes–don’t copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. ^^Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place–your reference system^^. [*](((eRojO1adJ)))
            - 3. Make permanent notes. Now turn to your slip-box. Go through the notes you made in step one or two (ideally once a day and before you forget what you meant) and ^^think about how they relate to what is relevant for your own research^^, thinking or interests. This can soon be done by looking into the slip-box–it only contains what interests you anyway. The idea is not to collect, but to develop ideas, arguments and discussions. ^^Does the new information contradict, correct, support or add to what you already have^^ (in the slip-box or on your mind)? ^^Can you combine ideas to generate something new^^? ^^What questions are triggered^^ by them? [*](((y5dDNqTm7)))
            - ^^Write exactly one note for each idea and write as if you were writing for someone else^^: Use full sentences, disclose your sources, make references and try to be as precise, clear and brief as possible. ^^Throw away the fleeting notes from step one^^ and put the literature notes from step two into your reference system. You can forget about them now. All that matters is going into the slip-box. [*](((DC7zUzXbl)))
            - 4. Now add your new permanent notes to the slip-box by: a) Filing each one behind one or more related notes (with a program, you can put one note “behind” multiple notes; if you use pen and paper like Luhmann, you have to decide where it fits best and add manual links to the other notes). Look to which note the new one directly relates or, if it does not relate directly to any other note yet, just file it behind the last one. b) ^^Adding links to related notes^^. c) Making sure you will be able to find this note later by either linking to it from your index or by making a link to it on a note that you use as an entry point to a discussion or topic and is itself linked to the index. [*](((nQY-Lsqjm)))
            - 5. ^^Develop your topics, questions and research projects^^ bottom up from within the system. See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. ^^Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments^^ and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. Even if you don’t have anything in your slip-box yet, you never start from scratch–you already have ideas on your mind to be tested, opinions to be challenged and questions to be answered. ^^Do not brainstorm for a topic^^. Look into the slip-box instead to ^^see where chains of notes have developed and ideas have been built up to clusters^^. Don’t cling to an idea if another, more promising one gains momentum. The more you become interested in something, the more you will read and think about it, the more notes you will collect and the more likely it is that you will generate questions from it. It might be exactly what you were interested in from the beginning, but it is more likely that your interests will have changed–that is what insight does. [*](((erCjnBgLf)))
            - 6. ^^After a while, you will have developed ideas far enough to decide on a topic to write about^^. ^^Your topic is now based on what you have^^, not based on an unfounded idea about what the literature you are about to read might provide. Look through the connections and collect all the relevant notes on this topic (most of the relevant notes will already be in partial order), copy them onto your “desktop”[ 6] and bring them in order. Look for what is missing and what is redundant. Don’t wait until you have everything together. Rather, try ideas out and give yourself enough time to go back to reading and note-taking to improve your ideas, arguments and their structure.  [*](((WUwVRqAv7)))
            - 7. ^^Turn your notes into a rough draft^^. Don’t simply copy your notes into a manuscript. ^^Translate them into something coherent^^ and embed them into the context of your argument while you build your argument out of the notes at the same time. Detect holes in your argument, fill them or change your argument. [*](((1bH-TT58u)))
            - 8. ^^Edit and proofread your manuscript^^. Give yourself a pat on the shoulder and turn to the next manuscript. [*](((Kq78J1EXj)))
            - These are the steps, presented as if you will write only one paper/ article at a time. In reality, you never work on just one idea, but many ideas in different stages at the same time. And that is where the system plays out its real strengths. We cannot help but think about more than one question at a time and the chances are that you will think and write in the future as well. It might not be for academia or a publication, but certainly for your own intellectual growth. Gather what you encounter along your way and don’t let any good idea go to waste. You might read a certain book in hope it could be useful for one of the papers you write. Maybe you are wrong, but it still might contain some interesting thoughts worth keeping and useful for something else you haven’t thought about yet. [*](((20T97LXDY)))
            - In truth, it is highly unlikely that every text you read will contain exactly the information you looked for and nothing else. Otherwise, you must have already known what was in there and wouldn’t have had reason to read it in the first place.[ 7] ^^As the only way to find out if something is worth reading is by reading it (even just bits of it)^^, it makes sense to use the time spent in the best possible way. We constantly encounter interesting ideas along the way and only a fraction of them are useful for the particular paper we started reading it for. Why let them go to waste? Make a note and add it to your slip-box. It improves it. Every idea adds to what can become a critical mass that turns a mere collection of ideas into an idea-generator. [*](((-1TPFSwyN)))
            - ^^A typical work day will contain many, if not all, of these steps^^: You read and take notes. You build connections within the slip-box, which in itself will spark new ideas. You write them down and add them to the discussion. You write on your paper, notice a hole in the argument and have another look in the file system for the missing link. You follow up on a footnote, go back to research and might add a fitting quote to one of your papers in the making. [*](((JyB58IMPZ)))
            - How focused you want to read depends on your priorities. You don’t have to read anything you don’t consider an absolute necessity for finishing your most urgent paper, but you will still encounter a lot of other ideas and information along the way. ^^Spending the little extra time to add them to your system will make all the difference^^, because the accidental encounters make up the majority of what we learn. [*](((EegQ1h74c)))
            - ^^Imagine if we went through life learning only what we planned to learn or being explicitly taught^^. I doubt we would have even learned to speak. Each added bit of information, filtered only by our interest, is a contribution to our future understanding, thinking and writing. And the best ideas are usually the ones we haven’t anticipated anyway. [*](((6mdYRieSi)))
            - ^^Most people follow different lines of thought at the same time^^. They might focus for a while on one idea, but then leave it alone for another while until they see how to proceed further. It is helpful then to be able to pick up on another idea now and go back to the earlier thought later. It is much more realistic to keep this flexibility and you don’t have to worry about starting all over. [*](((HYujK1QLt)))
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - Academic writing in itself is not a complicated process that requires a variety of complicated tools, but is in constant danger of being clogged with unnecessary distractions. Unfortunately, ^^most students collect and embrace over time a variety of learning and note-taking techniques, each promising to make something easier, but combined have the opposite effect^^. [*](((m46GGR6-d)))
        - "3.1 The Tool Box::"
            - We need four tools: · ^^Something to write with^^ and something to write on (pen and paper will do) · ^^A reference management system^^ (the best programs are free) · ^^The slip-box^^ (the best program is free) · ^^An editor^^ (whatever works best for you: very good ones are free) More is unnecessary, less is impossible. [*](((t2VqNF_Q0)))
            - 1. You need something to capture ideas whenever and wherever they pop into your head. Whatever you use, it should not require any thoughts, attention or multiple steps to write it down. It can be a notebook, a napkin, an app on your phone or iPad. These notes are not meant to be stored permanently. They will be deleted or chucked soon anyway. They only function as a reminder of a thought and are not meant to capture the thought itself, which requires time to phrase proper sentences and check facts. I recommend having pen and paper with you at all times. It is really hard to beat a notebook in its simplicity. If you use other tools, make sure everything ends up in one place, a central inbox or something like that, where you can process it soon, ideally within a day. [*](((SkzQQNXXK)))
            - 2. The reference system has two purposes: To collect the references (duh) and the notes you take during your reading. ^^I strongly recommend using a free program like Zotero^^, which allows you to make new entries via browser plugins or just by entering the ISBN or digital object identifier (DOI) number. Zotero also can be integrated into Microsoft Word, OpenOffice, LibreOffice and NeoOffice, which allows you to insert quotations without actually typing in the reference. That not only makes things easier, you also mitigate the risk of messing things up when you add, edit or delete additional references. You can also easily change the format according to the standards required by your professors or the journal you write for. You can add notes to each entry–but it would also be fine to write your notes by hand and link them to the reference if you prefer to write by hand at this stage. In that case, just give the notes a standardised title like “AuthorYear” and keep them in alphabetical order in one place. You can download Zotero for free at zotero.org (Windows, Mac and Linux). You will find the links to all recommended programs on takesmartnotes.com.[ 10] If you prefer or already work with another, equally simple program, there is no reason not to use that. [*](((xvdWq2okr)))
            - 3. The slip-box. Some prefer the old-fashioned pen and paper version in a wooden box. That's fine–computers can only speed up a relatively minor part of the work anyway, like adding links and formatting references. ^^They can’t speed up the main part of the work, which is thinking, reading and understanding^^. All you would need are sheets of paper about the size of a postcard (Luhmann used the DIN A6 size, 148 x 105 mm or 5.83 x 4.13 inches) and a box to keep them in. And even though there are clear benefits of handwriting (cf. below chapter 3.2.1), I recommend using the digital version, if only for mobility. Even though you could basically emulate the slip-box with any program that allows setting links and tagging (like Evernote or a Wiki), ^^I strongly recommend using Daniel Lüdecke’s Zettelkasten^^. It is the only program I know that really implements the principles behind Luhmann’s system and is at the same time simple and easy to use. It is free and available for different operating systems. You can download it from zettelkasten.danielluedecke.de (please consider sending a donation to the developer if you like it). [*](((pBumj4c-s)))
            - Finally, the editor: If you use Zotero, I recommend using one of the editors it is compatible with (Microsoft Word, OpenOffice, LibreOffice or NeoOffice), because it makes life a lot easier if you don’t have to type in every reference manually. Except for that, everything works fine–no editor can improve an argument. [*](((fqIz_07s5)))
            - If you have pen and paper, an editor, your slip-box and reference system at hand, you are ready to go. [*](((GcsR9eEaX)))
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - But with tools like the slip-box, we sometimes forget that the handling is as important as the possibilities of the tool itself. If we try to use a tool without putting any thought into the way we work with it, even the best tool would not be of much help. The slip-box, for example, would most likely be used as an archive for notes–or worse: a graveyard for thoughts (cf. Hollier 2005, 40 on Mallarmé’s index cards). ^^Unfortunately, there are quite a few explanations of Luhmann’s technique on the Internet that focus in a misleading way on the technicalities of the slip-box^^. This has led to plenty of misconceptions about its abilities. But things are changing: Luhmann’s slip-box is currently the object of a long-term research project at the University of Bielefeld, and their first results have already given us a comprehensive understanding about how Luhmann really worked with it. You can look up for yourself some of his notes on their website.[ 12] Soon, you will be able to access the whole digitalised slip-box online. Add to this understanding recent psychological insights about learning, creativity and thinking, and we also get a pretty good picture why it works. And it is indeed crucially important not only to know how it works or how to work with it, but also why it works. Only then will you be able to tweak it for your own needs. And this is what this book is for: To give you all the resources you need to work in the best possible way with the best technique available. By keeping just a few basic principles in mind and with an understanding of the logic behind the file system, I see no reason why anyone should not be able to replicate Luhmann’s formula for successful learning, writing and research. [*](((yIlbxuFst)))
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
            - Working as if nothing else counts than writing does not mean spending more time writing at the expense of everything else. Only if we compartmentalise our work into different, isolated tasks will it seem like focusing on writing reduces the time we spend on other tasks. But it does not mean to read less, for this is the main source of the writing material. It doesn’t mean to attend fewer lectures or seminars, because they provide you with the ideas to write about and questions worth answering. ^^Attending lectures is also one of the best ways to get an idea about the current state of research, not to mention the ability to ask and discuss questions^^. Focusing on writing also doesn’t mean to stop giving presentations or finding other ways of making your thoughts public. ^^Where else could you get feedback for your ideas^^? [*](((pbn4HW864)))
            - Focusing on writing as if nothing else counts does not necessarily mean you should do everything else less well, but it certainly makes you do everything else differently. Having a clear, tangible purpose when you attend a lecture, discussion or seminar will make you more engaged and sharpen your focus. You will not waste your time with the attempt to figure out what you “should” learn. Rather, you will try to learn as efficiently as possible so you can quickly get to the point where actual open questions arise, as these are the only questions worth writing about. You quickly learn to distinguish good-sounding arguments from actual good ones, as you will have to think them through whenever you try to write them down and connect them with your previous knowledge. It will change the way you read as well: You will become more focused on the most relevant aspects, knowing that you cannot write down everything. You will read in a more engaged way, because you cannot rephrase anything in your own words if you don’t understand what it is about. By doing this, you will elaborate on the meaning, which will make it much more likely that you will remember it. ^^You also have to think beyond the things you read, because you need to turn it into something new^^. And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. Deliberate practice is the only serious way of becoming better at what we are doing (cf. Anders Ericsson, 2008). If you change your mind about the importance of writing, you will also change your mind about everything else. ^^Even if you decide never to write a single line of a manuscript, you will improve your reading, thinking and other intellectual skills^^ just by doing everything as if nothing counts other than writing. [*](((9LdD6VzxA)))
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - We tend to think that big transformations have to start with an equally big idea. But more often than not, it is the simplicity of an idea that makes it so powerful (and often overlooked in the beginning). Boxes, for example, are simple. Malcom McLean, the owner of a trucking company and a former trucker himself, regularly got stuck in traffic on the crowded coastal highways. When he came up with an idea to circumvent the congested roads, it was a simple one. He had no clue that it would tip the world in a new direction. ^^He did not foresee that his simple idea would reshape the political landscape^^, let some nations rise to the top and other fall behind, make century-old professions redundant, give birth to new industries, and would barely leave a single person on earth unaffected by it. I am speaking, of course, of the shipping container, which is basically just a box. When McLean converted the tanker Ideal X to be able to carry 58 containers and set it to sail on 26 April 1956, it was just because it made more sense to ship parts of a lorry than the whole lorry itself, which in itself made more sense than to have them stand in traffic for days. He certainly did not aim to turn world trade upside down and pave the way for Asia to become the next big economic power. He just didn’t want to get stuck in traffic anymore. [*](((Zo2Uaa6y3)))
            - Many students and academic writers think like the early ship owners when it comes to note-taking. They handle their ideas and findings in the way it makes immediate sense: If they read an interesting sentence, they underline it. If they have a comment to make, they write it into the margins. If they have an idea, they write it into their notebook, and if an article seems important enough, they make the effort and write an excerpt. ^^Working like this will leave you with a lot of different notes in many different places. Writing, then, means to rely heavily on your brain to remember where and when these notes were written down^^. A text must then be conceptualised independently from these notes, which explains why so many resort to brainstorming to arrange the resources afterwards according to this preconceived idea. In this textual infrastructure, this so-often-taught workflow, it indeed does not make much sense to rewrite these notes and put them into a box, only to take them out again later when a certain quote or reference is needed during writing and thinking. [*](((iEoGjCKxY)))
            - "To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes:"
                - "1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two."
                - "2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box."
                - "3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished."
            - "Project-related notes can be:"
                - "comments in the manuscript"
                - "collections of project-related literature"
                - "outlines"
                - "snippets of drafts"
                - "reminders"
                - "to-do lists"
                - "and of course the draft itself."
            - When you close the folder for your current project in the evening and ^^nothing is left on your desk other than pen and paper^^, you know that you have achieved a clear separation between fleeting, permanent and project-related notes. [*](((Fn9n3Ydzb)))
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
            - ^^As proper note-taking is rarely taught or discussed, it is no wonder that almost every guide on writing recommends to start with brainstorming^^. If you haven’t written along the way, the brain is indeed the only place to turn to. On its own, it is not such a great choice: it is neither objective nor reliable–two quite important aspects in academic or nonfiction writing. The promotion of brainstorming as a starting point is all the more surprising as it is not the origin of most ideas: The things you are supposed to find in your head by brainstorming usually don’t have their origins in there. Rather, they come from the outside: through reading, having discussions and listening to others, through all the things that could have been accompanied and often even would have been improved by writing. The advice to think about what to write about before you write comes both too early and too late. Too late, as you already have passed up the chance to build up written resources when you face the white sheet of paper or the blank screen, but also too early, if you try to postpone every serious content-related work until you have made a decision on the topic. [*](((ww64gf_vE)))
            - ^^Even though academic writing is not a linear process, that does not mean you should follow an anything-goes approach^^. On the contrary, a clear, reliable structure is paramount.
 [*](((Qoz63n9I8)))
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
            - ^^A good workflow can easily turn into a virtuous circle, where the positive experience motivates us to take on the next task with ease^^, which helps us to get better at what we are doing, which in return makes it more likely for us to enjoy the work, and so on. But if we feel constantly stuck in our work, we will become demotivated and much more likely to procrastinate, leaving us with fewer positive or even bad experiences like missed deadlines. We might end up in a vicious circle of failure (cf. Fishbach, Eyal and Finkelstein, 2010). [*](((NcwnhsymJ)))
            - ^^Having a growth mindset is crucial^^, but only one side of the equation. Having a learning system in place that enables feedback loops in a practical way is equally important. Being open for feedback doesn’t help very much if the only feedback you can get comes once every few months for work you have already finished. The linear model of academic writing comes with very few feedback opportunities, and even those are usually spread out over time (vgl. Fritzsche, Young und Hickson, 2003). If you choose a topic for your paper and work according to the linear model, you will only learn if your choice was wise after multiple stages of research. The same applies to the question of if you understood what you read and if your idea for an argument makes sense. [*](((fAEc5q4n4)))
            - Our brains work not that differently in terms of interconnectedness. Psychologists used to think of the brain as a limited storage space that slowly fills up and makes it more difficult to learn late in life. But we know today that ^^the more connected information we already have, the easier it is to learn, because new information can dock to that information^^. Yes, our ability to learn isolated facts is indeed limited and probably decreases with age. But ^^if facts^^ are not kept isolated nor learned in an isolated fashion, but ^^hang together in a network of ideas^^, or “latticework of mental models” (Munger, 1994), ^^it becomes easier to make sense of new information^^. That makes it easier not only to learn and remember, but also to retrieve the information later in the moment and context it is needed. [*](((E6qEFWAIg)))
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - "9.1 Give Each Task Your Undivided Attention:"
                - "The good news is that we can train ourselves to stay focused on one thing for longer if we avoid multitasking, remove possible distractions and separate different kinds of tasks as much as possible so they will not interfere with each other. This too is not just a question of having the right mindset, but, equally important, of how we organise our workflow. A lack of structure makes it much more challenging to stay focused for extended periods of time. The slip-box provides not only a clear structure to work in, but also forces us to shift our attention consciously as we can complete tasks in reasonable time before moving on to the next one. Together with the fact that every task is accompanied by writing, which in itself requires undistracted attention, the slip-box can become a haven for our restless minds."
            - "9.2 Multitasking is not a good idea:"
            - "9.3 Give Each Task the Right Kind of Attention:"
            - "9.4 Become an Expert Instead of a Planner:"
            - "9.4 Become an Expert Instead of a Planner:"
            - "9.5 Get Closure:"
                - Here, we have to thank Soviet psychologist Bluma Zeigarnik for her insight and observational skills. The story goes that she went for lunch with her colleagues and was very impressed by the waiter’s ability to remember correctly who ordered what without the need to write anything down. It is said that she had to go back to the restaurant to get the jacket she left there. Much to her surprise, ^^the waiter she admired just minutes ago for his great memory didn’t even recognise her^^. Questioned about what seemed to her a contradiction, he explained that all the waiters had no problem remembering the orders and matching them with the guests at the table. But the very second diners left the restaurant, the waiters all forgot them completely and focused on the next group. [*](((GcyHK_4RN)))
                - ^^By taking into account these little insights into how our brains work, we can make sure that we will not get distracted^^ by thoughts of what we need from the supermarket when we sit at the desk. Rather, we may solve a crucial problem while we run errands. [*](((kfedAkb86)))
            - "9.6 Reduce the Number of Decisions:"
                - For the longest time, willpower was seen more as a character trait than a resource. This has changed. ^^Today, willpower is compared to muscles: a limited resource that depletes quickly and needs time to recover^^. Improvement through training is possible to a certain degree, but takes time and effort. The phenomenon is usually discussed under the term “ego depletion”: “We use the term ego depletion to refer to a temporary reduction in the self’s capacity or willingness to engage in volitional action (including controlling the environment, controlling the self, making choices, and initiating action) caused by prior exercise of volition.” ([[Baumeister et al., 1998]], 1253) [*](((IsHsEHJwf)))
                - ^^In the way we organise our research and writing, we too can significantly reduce the amount of decisions we have to make^^. While content-related decisions have to be made (on what is more and what is less important in an article, on the connections between notes, the structure of a text, etc.), most organisational decisions can be made up front, once and for all, by deciding on one system. By always using the same notebook for making quick notes, always extracting the main ideas from a text in the same way and always turning them into the same kind of permanent notes, which are always dealt with in the same manner, the number of decisions during a work session can be greatly reduced. That leaves us with much more mental energy that we can direct towards more useful tasks, like trying to solve the problems in question. [*](((gdS3acyLy)))
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
            - "“I would advise you to read with a pen in your hand and enter in a little book short hints of what you feel that is common or that may be useful; for this will be the best method of imprinting such portcullis in your memory.”–Benjamin Franklin[ 26]"
            - "10.1 Read With a Pen in Hand:"
            - "10.2 Keep an Open Mind:"
                - ^^The very moment we decide on a hypothesis, our brains automatically go into search mode, scanning our surroundings for supporting data^^, which is neither a good way to learn nor research. Worse, we are usually not even aware of this confirmation bias (or myside bias[ 28]) that surreptitiously meddles with our life. Somehow, we just seem to happen to be surrounded by people who all think alike. (Not on purpose, of course. We just spend our time with people we like. And why do we like them? Correct: Because they think like us.) We just seem to happen to read the publications that tend to confirm what we already know. (Not on purpose, of course. We just try to stick with good, intelligent texts. And what makes us think these texts are good and intelligent? Correct: because they make sense to us.) We look around and just cut out dis-confirming facts without even noticing what we don’t see, very much like the same city can one day be full of happy people and the other day full of miserable ones, depending on our mood. [*](((x1W4xVIOs)))
                - ^^Confirmation bias is a subtle but major force^^. As the psychologist Raymond Nickerson puts it: “If one were to attempt to identify a single problematic aspect of human reasoning that deserves attention above all others, the confirmation bias would have to be among the candidates for consideration” (Nickerson 1998, 175). [*](((JGSJdaEzM)))
                - ^^The slip-box is pretty agnostic about the content it is fed^^. It just prefers relevant notes. It is after reading and collecting relevant data, connecting thoughts and discussing how they fit together that it is time to draw conclusions and develop a linear structure for the argument. [*](((8wPqeAg-u)))
            - "10.3 Get the Gist:"
                - ^^Patterns that help us navigate texts and discourses are not only theories, concepts or the respective terminology, but also typical mistakes we automatically scan an argument for^^, general categories we apply, writing styles that indicate a certain school of thought or mental models we learn or develop from different insights and can collect like a great and ever-increasing set of thinking tools. Without these tools and reference points, no professional reading or understanding would be possible. We would read every text in the same way: like a novel. But with the learned ability of spotting patterns, we can enter the circle of virtuosity: Reading becomes easier, we grasp the gist quicker, can read more in less time, and can more easily spot patterns and improve our understanding of them. And along the way, we increase our set of thinking tools, which will not only help with academic work, but with thinking and understanding in general. That is why Berkshire Hathaway vice chairman Charlie Munger describes as worldly-wise someone who has a broad set of these tools and knows how to apply them. [*](((xvnduxIMw)))
                - But this dynamic can only start if we ourselves deliberately decide to take on the task of reading and being selective about it, relying on nothing other than our own judgement of what is important and what is not. Textbooks or secondary literature in general cannot take this off our hands, and students who solely rely on them have no chance of becoming “worldly wise.” This is not far off from what philosopher Immanuel Kant described in his famous text about the Enlightenment: “^^Nonage [immaturity] is the inability to use one’s own understanding without another’s guidance^^. This nonage is self-imposed if its cause lies not in lack of understanding but in indecision and lack of courage to use one’s own mind without another’s guidance. ^^Dare to know^^! (Sapere aude.) ‘^^Have the courage to use your own understanding^^,’ is therefore the motto of the Enlightenment.” (Kant 1784) [*](((wzyxLhq_8)))
            - "10.4 Learn to Read:"
                - "If you can’t say it clearly, you don’t understand it yourself.” (John Searle)"
                - Physicist and Nobel Prize winner ^^Richard Feynman once said that he could only determine whether he understood something if he could give an introductory lecture on it^^. Reading with a pen in your hand is the small-scale equivalent of a lecture. Permanent notes, too, are directed towards an audience ignorant of the thoughts behind the text and unaware of the original context, only equipped with a general knowledge of the field. The only difference is that the audience here consists of our future selves, which will very soon have reached the same state of ignorance as someone who never had access to what we have written about. Of course, it would be helpful to involve other people at all stages of the writing process, because then we can see in their faces how well we have put something or how convincing our arguments are, but that is rather impractical. [*](((Y0GWqkFs2)))
                - “The principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool,” Feynman stressed in a speech to young scientists (Feynman 1985, 342). Reading, especially rereading, can easily fool us into believing we understand a text. Rereading is especially dangerous because of the mere-exposure effect: ^^The moment we become familiar with something, we start believing we also understand it^^. On top of that, we also tend to like it more (Bornstein 1989). [*](((RQKWGCajX)))
                - "This is why choosing an external system that forces us to deliberate practice and confronts us as much as possible with our lack of understanding or not-yet-learned"
            - "10.5 Learn by Reading:"
                - When we try to answer a question before we know how to, we will later remember the answer better, even if our attempt failed (Arnold and McDermott 2013). If we put effort into the attempt of retrieving information, we are much more likely to remember it in the long run, even if we fail to retrieve it without help in the end (Roediger and Karpicke 2006). Even without any feedback, we will be better off if we try to remember something ourselves (Jang et al. 2012). The empirical data is pretty unambiguous, but these learning strategies do not necessarily feel right. Intuitively, most students resort to cramming, which is just another term for reading something again and again in a failed attempt to learn it (Dunlosky et al. 2013). And as much as rereading doesn’t help with learning, it certainly doesn’t help with understanding. Admittedly, cramming does get information into your head for a short while–usually long enough to stay in there to pass a test. But cramming won’t help you learn. As Terry Doyle and Todd Zakrajsek put it: “^^If learning is your goal, cramming is an irrational act^^” (Doyle and Zakrajsek 2013).[ 29] [*](((O34U8kfWC)))
                - It is not surprising, therefore, that the best-researched and most successful learning method is elaboration. It is very similar to what we do when we take smart notes and combine them with others, which is the opposite of mere re-viewing (Stein et al. 1984) ^^Elaboration means nothing other than really thinking about the meaning of what we read, how it could inform different questions and topics and how it could be combined with other knowledge^^. In fact, “Writing for Learning” is the name of an “elaboration method” (Gunel, Hand, and Prain 2007). But there is a caveat. Even though elaboration works verifiably well for deep understanding, it might not be the best choice if you just want to learn isolated encyclopaedic facts (Rivard 1994). But as long as you are not striving for a career as a quiz show candidate, why would you want that, anyway? The slip-box takes care of storing facts and information. Thinking and understanding is what it can’t take off your shoulders, which is why it makes sense to focus on this part of the work. That it facilitates learning as well is a nice side effect. Luhmann almost never read a text twice (Hagen 1997) and was still regarded as an impressive conversation partner who seemed to have all information ready to hand.[ 30] [*](((kjNNcmaWn)))
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
            - ^^Experienced academic readers usually read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches^^, while inexperienced readers tend to adopt the question of a text and the frames of the argument and take it as a given. What good readers can do is spot the limitations of a particular approach and see what is not mentioned in the text. [*](((x8xsQz6Ns)))
            - Jerome Bruner, a psychologist Lonka refers to, goes a step further and says that scientific thinking is plainly impossible if we can’t manage to think beyond a given context and we only focus on the information as it is given to us (Bruner, 1973, quoted after ibid.) It is not surprising, therefore, that Lonka recommends what Luhmann recommends: "^^Writing brief accounts on the main ideas of a text instead of collecting quotes^^." And she also stresses that it is no less important to do something with these ideas–to think hard about how they connect with other ideas from different contexts and could inform questions that are not already the questions of the author of the respective text. [*](((FHQGvn5p-)))
                - ^^Writing brief accounts on the main ideas of a text instead of collecting quotes^^.
            - "11.1 Make a Career One Note at a Time::"
                - ^^The technique of writing a certain amount every day was perfected by Anthony Trollope^^, one of the most popular and productive authors of the 19th century: He would start every morning at 5: 30 a.m. with a cup of coffee and a clock in front of him. Then he would write at least 250 words every 15 minutes. This, he writes in his autobiography: “allowed me to produce over ten pages of an ordinary novel volume a day, and if kept up through ten months, would have given as its results three novels of three volumes each in the year” (Trollope, 2008, 272). And that, mind you, was before breakfast. [*](((8_XJr9Hvr)))
            - "11.2 Think Outside the Brain::"
                - As we write notes with an eye towards existing notes, we take more into account than the information that is already available in our internal memory. That is extremely important, because the internal memory retrieves information not in a rational or logical way, but according to psycho-logical rules. The brain also doesn’t store information neurally and objectively. We reinvent and rewrite our memory every time we try to retrieve information. The brain works with rules of thumb and makes things look as if they fit, even if they don’t. It remembers events that never happened, connects unrelated episodes to convincing narratives and completes incomplete images. It cannot help but see patterns and meaning everywhere, even in the most random things (cf. Byrne, 2008). ^^The brain, as Kahneman writes, is “a machine for jumping to conclusions”^^ (Kahneman, 2013, 79). And a machine that is designed for jumping to conclusions is not the kind of machine you want to rely on when it comes to facts and rationality–at least, you would want to counterbalance it. Luhmann states as clearly as possible: it is not possible to think systematically without writing (Luhmann 1992, 53). Most people still think about thinking as a purely internal process, and believe that the only function of the pen is to put finished thoughts on paper. Richard Feynman once had a visitor in his office, a historian who wanted to interview him. When he spotted Feynman’s notebooks, he said how delighted he was to see such “wonderful records of Feynman’s thinking.” [*](((BernhIBab)))
                - "“No, no!” Feynman protested. “They aren’t a record of my thinking process. They are my thinking process. I actually did the work on the paper.”"
                - "“Well,” the historian said, “the work was done in your head, but the record of it is still here.” “No, it’s not a record, not really. It’s working. You have to work on paper, and this is the paper.”[ 33]"
                - Just by writing down these questions and making possible connections explicit in writing are the concepts and theories being investigated. Their limitations become as visible as their particular angle on a problem. ^^By explicitly writing down how something connects or leads to something else, we force ourselves to clarify and distinguish ideas from each other^^. [*](((-3tmMVdTO)))
            - "11.3 Learn by not Trying::"
                - "To be able to remember everything and not having to resort to any external memory sounds great initially. But you might think differently if you are familiar with the story of a man who was really able to remember almost everything. The reporter Solomon Shereshevsky (Lurija 1987) is one of the most famous figures in the history of psychology. When his supervisor saw that he didn’t take any notes during their meetings, he first doubted Shereshevsky’s dedication to the job, but shortly after, it was rather his own sanity that he doubted."
                - Robert and Elizabeth Ligon Bjork from the University of California suggest distinguishing between ^^two different measurements when it comes to memory: Storage strength and retrieval strength^^ (Bjork 2011). They speculate that storage strength, the ability to store memories, only becomes greater over one’s lifetime. We add more and more information to our long-term memory. Just by looking at the physical capacity of our brains, we can see that we could indeed probably store a lifetime and a bit of detailed experiences in it (Carey 2014, 42). [*](((J0FDxuUyD)))
            - "11.4 Adding Permanent Notes to the Slip - Box::"
                - "The next step after writing the permanent notes is to add them to the slip-box."
                - "1. Add a note to the slip-box either behind the note you directly refer to or, if you do not follow up on a specific note, just behind the last note in the slip-box. Number it consecutively. The Zettelkasten numbers the notes automatically. “New note” will just add a note with a new number. If you click “New note sequence,” the new note will be registered at the same time as the note that follows the note currently active on the screen. But you can always add notes “behind” other notes anytime later. Each note can follow multiple other notes and therefore be part of different note sequences."
                - "2. Add links to other notes or links on other notes to your new note."
                - "3. Make sure it can be found from the index; add an entry in the index if necessary or refer to it from a note that is connected to the index."
                - "4. Build a Latticework of Mental Models"
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
            - ^^Because the slip-box is not intended to be an encyclopedia, but a tool to think with, we don’t need to worry about completeness^^. We don’t need to write anything down just to bridge a gap in a note sequence. We only write if it helps us with our own thinking. The gaps we do need to concern ourselves with are the gaps in the arguments in the final manuscript–but these gaps will only become obvious in the next step, when we take the relevant notes for an argument out of the network of the slip-box and sort them into the linear order for the rough draft. [*](((iXpbFQLs4)))
            - "12.1 Develop Topics:"
                - "Assigning keywords is much more than just a bureaucratic act. It is a crucial part of the thinking process, which often leads to a deeper elaboration of the note itself and the connection to other notes."
                - Luhmann used four basic types of cross-references in his file-box (Schmidt 2013, 173f; Schmidt 2015, 165f). Only the first and last are relevant for the digital Zettelkasten, the other two are merely compensating for restrictions of the analogue pen and paper version. You don’t need to concern yourself with them if you use the digital program.
            - "12.2 Make Smart Connections:"
                - "It is important to always keep in mind that making these links is not a chore, a kind of file-box maintenance. The search for meaningful connections is a crucial part of the thinking process towards the finished manuscript. But here, it is dealt with in a very concrete way. Instead of figuratively searching our internal memory, we literally go through the file-box and look for connections. By dealing with actual notes, we are also less prone to imagine connections where there aren’t any, as we can see in black and white if something makes sense or not."
            - "12.3 Compare, Correct and Differentiate:"
                - "If you use the slip-box for a while, you will inevitably make a sobering discovery: The great new idea you are about to add to the slip-box turns out to be already in there. Even worse, chances are this idea wasn’t even yours, but someone else’s. Having the same thought twice or mistaking another person’s idea with our own is far from unusual. Unfortunately, most people never notice this humbling fact because they have no system that confronts them with already thought thoughts. If we forget about an idea and have it again, our brains get as excited as if we are having it the first time. Therefore, working with the slip-box is disillusioning, but at the same time it increases the chance that we actually move forward in our thinking towards uncharted territory, instead of just feeling like we are moving forward."
            - "12.4 Assemble a Toolbox for Thinking:"
                - Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett’s partner and vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, stresses the importance of having a broad theoretical toolbox–not to be a good academic, but to have a good, pragmatic grip on reality. He regularly explains to students which mental models have proven most useful to help him understand markets and human behaviour. ^^He advocates looking out for the most powerful concepts in every discipline and to try to understand them so thoroughly that they become part of our thinking^^. ^^The moment one starts to combine these mental models and attach one’s experiences to them, one cannot help but gain what he calls “worldly wisdom.”^^ The importance is to have not just a few, but a broad range of mental models in your head. Otherwise, you risk becoming too attached to one or two and see only what fits them. ^^You would become the man with a hammer who sees nails everywhere^^ (cf. Maslow, 1966, 15). [*](((1wgkvLBXo)))
                - ^^We learn something not only when we connect it to prior knowledge and try to understand its broader implications (elaboration)^^, but also when we try to retrieve it at different times (spacing) in different contexts (variation), ideally with the help of chance (contextual interference) and with a deliberate effort (retrieval). The slip-box not only provides us with the opportunity to learn in this proven way, it forces us to do exactly what is recommended just by using it. We have to elaborate on what we read just to be able to write it down and translate it into different contexts. We retrieve information from the slip-box whenever we try to connect new notes with old notes. Just by doing this, we mix up contexts, shuffle notes and retrieve the information in irregular intervals. And along the way, we further elaborate on the information, which we always retrieve deliberately. [*](((3alXROjys)))
            - "12.5 Use the Slip - Box as a Creativity Machine:"
                - “Creativity is just connecting things. When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty because they didn’t really do it, they just saw something.” (Steve Jobs) [*](((ePVcU_TAX)))
                - "But the reason why Watson and Crick or Kekulé had these insights and not a random person on the street is that they already had spent a very long time thinking hard about the problems, tinkered with other possible solutions and tried countless other ways of looking at the problem. Our fascination with these stories clouds the fact that all good ideas need time. Even sudden breakthroughs are usually preceded by a long, intense process of preparation."
                - "Steven Johnson, who wrote an insightful book about how people in science and in general come up with genuine new ideas, calls it the “slow hunch.” As a precondition to make use of this intuition, he emphasises the importance of experimental spaces where ideas can freely mingle (Johnson 2011). A laboratory with open-minded colleagues can be such a space, much as intellectuals and artists freely discussed ideas in the cafés of old Paris. I would add the slip-box as such a space in which ideas can mingle freely, so they can give birth to new ones."
            - "12.6 Think Inside the Box:"
                - "“Creative people are better at recognizing relationships, making associations and connections and seeing things in an original way—seeing things that others cannot see“ (Andreasen 2014)."
                - "Sometimes the breakthrough in a scientific process is the discovery of a simple principle behind a seemingly very complicated process. Burger and Starbird remind us of the long history of human attempts to fly: We tried to emulate birds by flapping wing-like apparatuses with feathers and all, but in the end, it was about not getting distracted by details and discovering that the subtle bending of the wing is the only thing that counts."
            - "12.7 Facilitate Creativity through Restrictions:"
                - A clear structure allows us to explore the internal possibilities of something. Even the act of breaking with convention depends on it. ^^The limitation of the canvas does not make the artistic expressions of painters seem limited^^, but opens up the possibility of an artist like Lucio Fontana to cut into the canvas instead of painting on it. It is not even true that a more complex structure provides more possibilities. Quite the contrary. The binary code is radically more limited than the alphabet as it contains only two states, one or zero, but it opened up a range of creative possibilities that is unprecedented. [*](((5_G906hd1)))
                - ^^The biggest threat to creativity and scientific progress is therefore the opposite: a lack of structure and restrictions^^. Without structure, we cannot differentiate, compare or experiment with ideas. Without restrictions, we would never be forced to make the decision on what is worth pursuing and what is not. Indifference is the worst environment for insight. And the slip-box is, above all, a tool for enforcing distinctions, decisions and making differences visible. One thing is for sure: the common idea that we should liberate ourselves from any restrictions and “open ourselves up” to be more creative is very misleading indeed (Dean 2013, 201). [*](((cEY7Tb21M)))
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
            - “^^Writing itself makes you realise where there are holes in things^^. I’m never sure what I think until I see what I write. And so I believe that, even though you’re an optimist, the analysis part of you kicks in when you sit down to construct a story or a paragraph or a sentence. You think, ‘Oh, that can’t be right.’ And you have to go back, and you have to rethink it all.” (Carol Loomis)[ 37] [*](((5LSeCJWB5)))
            - "13.1 From Brainstorming to Slip - box - Storming:"
                - "Good questions are in the sweet spot of being relevant and interesting, not too easy to answer but possible to tackle with material that is available or at least within our reach. When it comes to finding good questions, it is therefore not enough to think about it. We have to do something with an idea before we know enough about it to make a good judgement. We have to work, write, connect, differentiate, complement and elaborate on questions–but this is what we do when we take smart notes."
            - "13.2 From Top Down to Bottom Up:"
                - "If open-mindedness is all that is needed, the best artists and scientists were hobbyists. Jeremy Dean, who has written extensively on routines and rituals and suggests seeing old ways of thinking as thinking routines, puts it well when he writes that we cannot break with a certain way of thinking if we are not even aware that it is a certain way of thinking (Dean, 2013)."
            - "13.3 Getting Things Done by Following Your Interests:"
                - "Organizing the work so we can steer our projects in the most promising direction not only allows us to stay focused for longer, but also to have more fun–and that is a fact (Gilbert 2006).[ 39]"
            - "13.4 Finishing and Review:"
                - "Another key point: Try working on different manuscripts at the same time. While the slip-box is already helpful to get one project done, its real strength comes into play when we start working on multiple projects at the same time. The slip-box is in some way what the chemical industry calls “verbund.” This is a setup in which the inevitable by-product of one production line becomes the resource for another, which again produces by-products that can be used in other processes and so on, until a network of production lines becomes so efficiently intertwined that there is no chance of an isolated factory competing with it anymore."
                - Remember: ^^Luhmann’s answer to the question of how one person could be so productive was that he never forced himself to do anything and only did what came easily to him^^. “When I am stuck for one moment, I leave it and do something else.” When he was asked what else he did when he was stuck, his answer was: “Well, writing other books. I always work on different manuscripts at the same time. With this method, to work on different things simultaneously, I never encounter any mental blockages.” (Luhmann, Baecker, and Stanitzek 1987, 125–55) It is like martial arts: If you encounter resistance or an opposing force, you should not push against it, but redirect it towards another productive goal. The slip-box will always provide you with multiple possibilities. [*](((2WQrQNiI-)))
            - "13.5 Becoming an Expert by Giving up Planning:"
                - The problem with the linear model is not just that one phase might need longer than planned, but that it is highly unlikely that we will finish a phase sooner than planned. If the whole problem was just an error in judgement, we would on average overestimate the time we need as often as we underestimate it, but unfortunately, that is not how it works. ^^According to the famous law of Parkinson, every kind of work tends to fill the time we set aside for it^^, like air fills every corner of a room (Parkinson 1957). [*](((fan1jviXy)))
            - "13.6 The Actual Writing:"
                - If there is one piece of advice that is worth giving, it is to keep in mind that the first draft is only the first draft. ^^((Y-BtvcQ1g))^^. By the time he stopped writing, he was always surprised to find that the only thing left to do was revise the draft he already had. [*](((0907r7J3B)))
                    - Slavoj Žižek said in an interview[ 41] that he wouldn’t be able to write a single sentence if he didn’t start by convincing himself he was only writing down some ideas for himself, and that maybe he could turn it into something publishable later
                - ^^One of the most difficult tasks is to rigorously delete what has no function within an argument–“kill your darlings.”^^[ 42] This becomes much easier when you move the questionable passages into another document and tell yourself you might use them later. For every document I write, I have another called “xy-rest.doc,” and every single time I cut something, I copy it into the other document, convincing myself that I will later look through it and add it back where it might fit. Of course, it never happens–but it still works. Others who know a thing or two about psychology do the same (cf. Thaler, 2015, 81f). [*](((Gz-S3DnUJ)))
            - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
                - "“It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copybooks and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.” (Whitehead) "
                - "The trick is not to try to break with old habits and also not to use willpower to force oneself to do something else, but to strategically build up new habits that have a chance to replace the old ones. The goal here is to get into the habit of fetching pen and paper whenever we read something, to write down the most important and interesting aspects. If we manage to establish a routine in this first step, it becomes much easier to develop the urge to turn these findings into permanent notes and connect them with other notes in the slip-box. It is not so difficult to get used to thinking within an external memory of notes, as the advantages become obvious quite quickly. As soon as we have developed a new routine, we can do what intuitively feels right, which requires no effort. Watching others reading books and doing nothing other than underlining some sentences or making unsystematic notes that will end up nowhere will soon be a painful sight."
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
            - Don’t underestimate the challenge of changing your behaviour, when familiarity and limited experience breeds false confidence in a poor technique  [*](((x5hx3y9ay)))
                - "mere-exposure effect: doing something many times makes us believe we have become good at it–completely independent of our actual performance(Bornstein 1989). We unfortunately tend to confuse familiarity with skill."
    - [[Afterword]]
- Annotated Manuscript::
    - [[Introduction]] [*](((9LhkaQTHi)))
    - "[[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]"
        - "1.3 The slip-box manual:"
    - "[[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]"
    - "[[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]"
    - "[[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]"
    - "[[The Four Underlying Principles]]"
        - "[[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]"
        - "[[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]"
        - "[[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]"
        - "[[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]"
    - "[[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]"
        - "[[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]"
        - "[[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]"
        - "[[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]"
        - "[[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  "
        - "[[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]"
        - "[[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]"
- Fleeting Notes:: 
- [[Goals for Book Club]], [[November 1st, 2020]]
    1. Read a book well and, in the case of this book, use the learning reflexively
    2. Develop ideas about how best to read, understand and take in books for recall and connecting to other research and ideas
    3. Learn about collaborative note-taking and what its possibilities and limits are
    4. Help drive the development of Roam accordingly
- # Tasks 
    - {{[[TODO]]}} Draft "Fleeting Notes:: "
    - {{[[TODO]]}} Review plans for a [[Meetup]]
- # Meetings 
    - ## [[Roam Book Club 2]], [[November 8th, 2020]]
        - "[[Live Session 2]] Starting 12.30 PST"
        - ### Publishing a book in Roam
            - Luca Dellana 
                - __Author [Luca Dellanna](https://cwhitesullivan.acemlna.com/lt.php?s=e352d96a208551fc518e1f937603a90d&i=150A977A20A750) recently published his book Ergodicity as a Roam graph! Luca is going to join us today to reflect on the experience, and give us some advice about what is possible when exploring a book in Roam at the block level like we are with Sönke's book. A discussion with someone else at the frontier!__
                - Examples use the ‘Mention’ tag, eg: Examples on sport, and can then filter it 
                - Purchasers get a JSON copy to upload to their own graph. Not sure how/if possible to markup the shared copy. 
                - See [Roam Books](https://roam-books.com/)
        - ### Discussion 
            - #Chat [[Nico Macdonald]] Knowing what you have read in a shared ‘Roam book’ #in-response-to [[Kristina Wolter]]’s question @Luca - how might someone keep track of what they read and what is still remaining?  I can imagine someone could get lost in this format 
                - [[[[Matt Brockwell/MJB]]]] #kristina that’s a great question, bookmarks lose their meaning in a multidimensional space 
                - [[Nico Macdonald]] @[[Matt Brockwell/MJB]] I think @Kristina’s question is significant as knowing what I have read of Smart Notes has become an issue, as usually I would highlight something on each page of a book and know from that if I had read it. But we can’t highlight the main text and thus it’s hard to do this. (I think we should discuss methods for keeping tabs on progress.)
                - [[Luca Dellana]] Have a table of contents so the reader can keep track of where they have gone 
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] I am checking the graph daily and I like the writing prompt idea 
            - [[Stanley]] I am seeing how people are learning to use Roam 
                - [[Matt McKinlay]] Novelty is messy. Jumping in is better than asking what to do. 
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] Try looking at the graphs of individual pages 
            - [[Brandon Toner]] You can thread chat requests in specific places 
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] We can read this book more closely than others would 
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] Get into the habit of Block referencing and using [[Block Reference Autocomplete]] to excerpt parts of a par. 
            - [[Beau Haan]] Discussion of [[Literature Notes]] 
        - ### "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 4 Graph meditation **", [[November 8th, 2020]]
            - I like the way [[Christopher Boone]] linked these ideas: 
                - "This relates to "plans vs. structure" again [back here*](((4WxDkQTNQ)))"
            - And the way [[Latham Turner]] highlighted specific text: 
                - "My experience of schooling 100% aligned with when [[Sönke Ahrens]] says{{alias:((rfxlhKub4))the written work represents a preceded performance, namely learning, understanding, and the ability to analyse other texts critically.  In this mindset, the writing of a paper is just another skill to be learned.}} I think if I had learned how to do this, I would have been much more engaged with the process of learning, rather than showing off that I was smart without having done any work.  I wanted to be engaged in truly groundbreaking learning, but I never could do it."
            - And [[Joshua Gerald Butler]] extracted key ideas: 
                - "[[Literature Notes]]"
            - However quite a lot of people’s [[Fleeting Notes]] seem to be empty 
        - ### To discuss 
            - {{[[DONE]]}} Add links in the main text 
                - [[@Matthew McKinlay]] 
            - Should we copy all the blocks to our pages 
    - ## [[Live Session Notes]], [[November 15th, 2020]]
        - Hosted by [[Bardia Pourvakil]]
        - ## "Define a literature note in your own words."
            - Identifying key data, information, quotes and ideas – and series of such – that represent the relevant insights of the text, and that will help one to most easily recapture (elements) of it. 
            - Elaborate on those elements, add to them, note related ideas and texts, and contradict them and critique them. 
            - Link those (meta-)notes to one’s research and writing.  
        - ## Breakout to discuss what we've written and how we can take better literature notes
            - With [[Eben Halford]], [[Mellisa Waltzer]], [[Alex Shchedrin]], [[Mika Mauger]] and [[Bill Petro]]
            - [[Mellisa Waltzer]] Ontologies vs [what?]
            - [[Eben Halford]] What is a Literature Note re a Zettel? 
            - [[Eben Halford]] Reflective writing approach: What, So what, Now what
            - [[Nico Macdonald]] How do we do research (Literature Notes) and, after we have written something, add new Notes to this and update what we have written, or create something new? 
            - [[Eben Halford]] Some people write Twitter threads and add new ideas on, sometimes a long time after... We should be able to change our minds. 
            - [[Alex Shchedrin]] Is anyone drafting their Tweets in Roam? 
            - [[Bill Petro]] I am able to write things more quickly in Roam and massage the flow more easily... Writing things down so that we forget them 
            - [[Nico Macdonald]] Education is what you remember (are left with?) after you have forgotten what you have learned 
            - [[Bill Petro]] I have forgotten more Greek than I have learned 
            - [[Nico Macdonald]] See in [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]], "Slavoj Žižek said in an interview[ 41] that he wouldn’t be able to write a single sentence if he didn’t start by convincing himself he was only writing down some ideas for himself, and that maybe he could turn it into something publishable later"
            - [[Bill Petro]] [On writing angry emails but not sending them]
            - [Discussion of [[Drawing with the right side of your brain]]]
            - [[Alex Shchedrin]] I have been using 750words.com to connect my brain and keyboard 
        - ## Group demo 
            - __Demonstrate how I [[Bardia Pourvakil]] use ((block references)) to make my literature notes and we'll do a short exercise to get everyone up to speed on how to make use of block references with the slip-box method in Roam__
            - [[Matt Brockwell]] [On using [[Readwise]] on iOS to capture text from a printed book]
            - [[Juan Caicedo]] I import my [[Fleeting Notes]] via [[Readwise]]
                - @Juan Caicedo: Once you have replace a block reference with ‘text and alias’  – which we were doing last week – you can Block Reference by (()) the string in which you are interested, and that will prompt you to ‘Create as block below’. That block will also be uniquely referenceable.
            - [[Nico Macdonald]] There is an interesting user interface issue where only one of my paragraphs post under (https://roamresearch.com/#/app/roam-book-club-2/page/x5hx3y9ay) appears, and it is a paragraph nested under my actual synopsis. The little ‘Roam astrolabe’ icons, of which there are two, indicated something but I am not sure what.
            - [Exercise: Roam around Roam]
        - ## Breakout 
            - __Then we will break out again into smaller groups and do a 10 minute [[literature note]] writing exercise followed by a 10 minute exercise where everyone will teach the rest of their group what they learned from the writing exercise__
            - "__Then we will break out again into smaller groups and do a 10 minute [[literature note]] writing exercise followed by a 10 minute exercise where everyone will teach the rest of their group what they learned from the writing exercise__"
    - ## [[Roam Book Club 2]], [[November 22nd, 2020]]
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 1** [[Writing practice]]"
            - "Reflect on the work and timeline- has it been easy/hard to get through the phases so far? "
                - It has been hard. I skimmed the book for "[[Roam Book Club 2]], [[November 8th, 2020]]" and found that session useful, but struggled to make time for . I think the problem is a combination of work and other commitments; finding the book somewhat dry (I usually read books on more explicitly societal subjects); and not convincing myself it would be a beneficial read and, rather, resisting the external commitment of reading. 
                - I would have perhaps been prompted by seeing highlights of what others were extracting or some sense of activity on the graph.  
                - Another technique I use which I could have employed would have been to read formal and user reviews of the book. 
                - I could also have dived into the graph and browsers what others were highlighting and/or commenting on. 
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 2** [[Breakout Rooms]]"
            - Participants 
                - [[Nico Macdonald]] in London, UK 
                - [[Geerrthana]] (Keet-ana) in Ontario, Canada 
                - [[Carolina Brum]] in Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
                - [[Adrian Brookes]] in Woking, UK 
                - [[Gleb Reys]] in Dublin, Ireland 
            - Is anyone using Roam to organise their writing 
                - [[Carolina Brum]] I am still organising my notes horizontally, rather than structuring with [[Literature Notes]], etc. [Discusses how she structures tags with meta information]
                - [[Geerrthana]] Can you see on which data a block was added? 
            - How do we note books? 
                - [[Adrian Brookes]] Skim read, don’t do fleeing notes (as not necessary with e-book), then highlight to create [[Literature Notes]], then read highlights and bold them, then read summary notes. I don’t ‘lay the path but wait to see where people walk’.   
                - Tree or table of contents with field tags and annotate. Notes and higher-level tagging. Sometimes I come back and try to see it again. But not 100% sure about my process.  I don’t tag everything, but I look at the context of a tagged item. 
        - {{[[TODO]]}} **Section 3 Block References**
            - [[Missed Name]]Re-stating things in your own words has been incredibly important to under
            - [[@Matthew McKinlay]] What is a [[Zettel]]? 
                - [[Henry Finkelstein]] A core idea, with one or more literature notes associated with it, so it can be [validated]
                - [[@Matthew McKinlay]] Atomicity, component level, for later remixing. An extension of [[Literature Notes]], though can go from a [[Fleeting Notes]] to a [[Zettel]]. 
                - [Browse graph]
                - [[@Matthew McKinlay]] Value of finding and connecting others’ notes to yours 
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 4** [[Book Club member talk]]"
            - Demo of [[Dharam Kapila]] @DharamKapila’s Roam Portal Chrome extension, which presents a highly searchable, interactive 3D visualisation of a @RoamResearch graph
        - "{{[[TODO]]}} **Section 5: This coming week**"
    - ## [[Roam Book Club 2]], [[November 29th, 2020]]
    - ## [[Roam Book Club 2]], [[November 29th, 2020]]
        - [[Live Session writing]]
        - "[[Live Session 5]] Start 12:30 PST "
            - For over 20 years I have taken digital notes on articles, books, talks, spoken word radio, conversations and other sources of information and ‘knowledge’. I have over 800 Evernotes reporting on events I have attended in real life and, now, more online. The information in these notes is rich and (pretty) accurate. Much of it is original, that is, not reported or recorded by others. 
            - I have written commercially, as a journalist, for almost 30 years and there are a huge number of subjects with which I am familiar and about which I could write a substantive piece, or pieces – or a book. 
            - I want to be able to make my writing more efficient and effective, to be able to assemble material and text elements (blocks) easily and quickly to enable me to write new pieces. 
            - But I want to go further than this and find a new way of expressing myself and sharing information, knowledge and ideas which addresses the challenge of modern knowledge access, and the new possibilities of how we find, contextualise and make sense. 
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 1** [[Writing practice]]"
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 2** Zettel writing session with [[Beau Haan]]"
            - ""Template - Apply children as text"" in [[Nico Macdonald/Zettels]]
            - Reflects  on Inductive vs Deductive approach to reading a book 
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] Avoid [[Zettelkasten]] that amounts to vague aphorisms. If you go back in 20 years time, you should be able to show how two thoughts were connected. 
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 3** [[Break Out Rooms]]"
            - With [[Mika Mauger]], [[asha]], [[Ronaldo Batista]], [[Max Kunzelmann]] and [[Nico Macdonald]]
            - [[asha]] I used to finish a book and be done with it but not necessarily remember it [check]
            - [[Mika Mauger]] You are making these notes to discuss with your future self 
            - [[Nico Macdonald]] What are you writing/creating using Roam? 
                - [[Ronaldo Batista]] I am trying to write blog posts about programming but they become too big 
                - [[Max Kunzelmann]] Blog posts on my Web site. Still studying while working. Want to finish the book so I can focus on [[Zettels]]. Planning to write paper in Roam. 
            - [[asha]] What is your workflow on Roam? And how do you learn it? 
                - [[Nico Macdonald]] See [Nat Eliason: Blog, Book Notes, Newsletter, and More](https://www.nateliason.com/) courses 
                - [[Nico Macdonald]] See [Markdown Linker - Chrome Web Store](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/markdown-linker/kgadgjmlofjccpefhdagbonmohjknlll)
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 4** Graph Meditation"
            - Reviewing of the graph by [[Dharam Kapila]] using his Roam Portal Chrome extension, and demo of new ‘globe’ feature to show cities mentioned. 
                - #InChat Great, @Dharam! I have added: ‘Location:: [[London, UK]]’ to my page at: https://roamresearch.com/#/app/roam-book-club-2/page/rN2s2S3Ze   
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 5** [[Matt Brockwell]] to explore spaced repetition tools"
            - "Here is a brief [[Tutorial]] of how to use Anki-style spaced repetition using the Roam Toolkit browser extension (chrome/firefox) ... (this tutorial written by [[Matt Brockwell/MJB]] on [[November 29th, 2020]])"
            - Discussion of the [[Semantic Web]] and the need for a [[Triple store primitive]] in Roam with [[Atif Shaikh]]
                - [[Nico Macdonald]] #InChat @Atif: Indeed! There is a feature request for a triple store primitive. TBH, the Semantic Web is being readied in cruder and less elegant ways than TB-L imagined.
                - [[Atif Shaikh]] #InChat @Nico: yeah i requested that on discourse :D 
                - [[Nico Macdonald]] #InChat @Atif: Great. May the Semantic Web idea will be replied for public knowledge in some way!
        - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 6** What's next"
    - ## [[Roam Book Club 2]], [[December 6th, 2020]]
        - "[[Live Session 6]] Starting 12:00 PST"
            - "[Zoom Link](https://us02web.zoom.us/j/89124754465?pwd=R2VIUnFlVVZMVEptcktZdEc2MisyQT09)"
            - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 1** [[Writing practice]]"
                - ((xue-ufV35))
                - "Pick from the prompts below and write in your own page for 25 minutes."
                - "Questions for us from [[Sönke Ahrens]]"
                    - "What have you learnt about note taking that I (Sönke) should know about?"
                    - "Are there any additions to the process described in the book?"
                    - "Discuss your impression of the range of possibilities and limitations of a Zettelkasten?"
                    - "(what use cases does it work for? Are there any examples it doesn't work for?)"
                - "General review questions "
                    - "Reflect on your impressions of the book "
                    - "Reflect on your note taking and reading. What if anything, has changed?"
                        - My model of note-taking is based more on spoken-word (radio, podcasts, videos, broadcast television) than on reading, though I also read quite a lot. 
                        - I focus on spoken-word as it is a medium in which more people who have interesting ideas can express themselves, either as they don’t have time to put their ideas down in writing, or because they better express themselves when they speak, and when they are in conversation. 
                        - Also, as spoken-word is more laborious and costly to produce, this tends to act as a filter for better content. Where the spoken-word output is based on broadcast radio or television, which is still constrained by time, this also tends to act as a filter for better content. 
                        - I tend to listen to or watch content and look out for ideas I haven’t heard before; ideas with which I am familiar that are well expressed or with some new nuance; or data or examples which back up an argument. 
                        - As most spoken-word content isn’t transcribed and there are no closed-captions for it I have to write down these excerpts, often running the timeline back to catch up or clarify a point. As a result I believe I have a richer grasp of my note-taking than if I were just highlighting in a book or article. 
                        - There is also great value in these notes as they will tend to be more unique, as few people transcribe spoken-word, rather they focus on books, papers and article. 
                        - I now use tags in Roam to associate these notes together, and create pages for areas I want expect to research more or write about. However, I have not yet developed a [[Zettelkasten]] method for summarising and abstracting these notes. 
                        - I also share much of what I note via Twitter so it is available for others to review and, hopefully, use. 
                    - "Do you plan to continue your Zettelkasten from here?  "
            - "{{[[DONE]]}} **Section 2** Talk with [[Sönke Ahrens]]"
                - 
                - "[[Dharam Kapila]] to use [[Roam Portal]] to show us around the graph"
                - "Group discussion and questions"
                - "Exploring the #Zettels   tag"
            - "{{[[TODO]]}} **Section 3** [[Break Out Rooms]]"
                - "{{[[POMO]]: 30}}"
            - "{{[[TODO]]}} **Section 4** Reflections and Graph decisions"
                - "{{[[POMO]]: 15}}"
                - 
    - ## [[Roam Book Club 2]], [[December 13th, 2020]]
        - https://otter.ai/u/CGAibNSN8_gm82VPcKO2b96YpVQ 
        - ### "{{[[TODO]]}} **Section 1** [[Writing practice]] "
            - "The book promotes a bottom up approach to note taking, which we have used in Book Club. Reflect on this. How did this feel? " (cc [[Jason Carman]])
                - Somewhat overwhelming. There were over 100 people involved in the book club and the contributions were many and varied. I was somewhat fearful about dipping into them for a number of reasons: 
                    - Although the book is significant and I know it will have value for me, I find it easier to engage with books that are more ideas-led and focused on real-work issues 
                    - I had skimmed the book for the Fleeting Notes stage but not read it properly and was finding it hard to get the time to catch up 
                    - It was hard to know where to start reviewing people’s [[Fleeting Notes]], [[Permanent Notes]] and [[Zettels]] 
                        - There is no easy way to track what one has reviewed (other than just remembering, or posting a ‘reaction’ to a piece) so it feels as if one might make progress and then go backwards 
                    - I have such high hopes of Roam and the collaborative knowledge model, and I was fearful that the results might disappoint 
                - Possible solutions 
                    - Develop a more realtime way of keeping up with contributions to the graph, more like an email list or a social media newsfeed 
                    - Create an easier way to ‘favourite’ or bookmark others’ blocks one want to save 
                    - Create a ‘follower’ model or a social graph that would allow one to filter a feed/blocks to show those which are likely to be of more interest 
                    - Appoint an editor to create a more digestible highlights of what has been contributed over a given period 
        - ### "{{[[TODO]]}} **Section 2** [[Breakout Rooms]]"
            - [[Alex Shchedrin]], Mark M., [[Jason Carman]]
            - [Discussed the kinds of books we read] 
            - [Discussed tools, including [[Otter.ai]] and [[ReadWise]]]
            - [Discussed
        - ### [[Group discussion]]
            - [[Mike Kramer]] Process: 
                - TRAP: 
                    - Tag: does creating a new tag make sense if you have created a block 
                    - Relate: [[Niklas Luhmann]] doesn’t 
                    - Arrange: where is the causality in the relationship? ‘What is the relationship among these notes’
                    - Pinpoint: Flesh out 
                - I don’t distinguish [[Zettels]] which come from me or the author 
                - I want my [[Zettels]] to be declarative [check], to be true or false
                    - Matt Brockwell to Everyone (9:50 pm) Henry, nice, declarative but not empirical. They are like “opinions” and we are allowed to change them later
                    - Doc Ayomide to Everyone (9:52 pm) But I do find value in what Mike’s saying about identifying if my Zettels are falsifiable versus if they’re something else.
                    - Henry Finkelstein to Everyone (9:52 pm) The key piece is that if I state without evidence, the burden is on me to find evidence
            - [[Henry Finkelstein]] to Everyone (9:42 pm) Deductive logic is very limiting - [inductive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inductive_reasoning) and [abductive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abductive_reasoning) can also be very potent ways to make sense of the world
            - [[Henry Finkelstein]] If the mnemonic doesn’t work, perhaps the thing isn’t a [[Zettel]]? 
            - [[Charles Farr]] Some of the idea I record I don’t know the source of and I indicate a level of age to them [check]. I use the seedlings, budding and [[Evergreen Notes]] model 
            - [[Beau Haan]] [missed] [[Niklas Luhmann]] said he wanted to have connections to the notes which are furthest away 
                - Henry Finkelstein to Everyone (9:52 pm)
                - The key piece is that if I state without evidence, the burden is on me to find evidence
                - Matt Brockwell to Everyone (9:52 pm) This is interesting, Beau is suggesting that the “fleeting note” be a repository for “hunches”, such as they are. That’s an interesting way to think about a potential purpose for fleeting notes
            - [[Matt Brockwell]] Most of what we propose are answers to questions and if we hold these questions in our minds we might find other answers [check]
        - ### "{{[[TODO]]}} **Section 3** [[Graph Meditation]]"
            - "Reflect on Roam Book Club"
                - It is great that the [[Roam Book Club]] is able to get some many people together who are engaged with knowledge, and the challenge of creating new paradigms for assembling, organising and presenting knowledge
                - It is also interesting that some of the smartest people I've come across are involved in the book club, where in the particular domain is involved – creative industries, digital design, innovation – I don't find such a high level of engagement and wisdom.
                - Areas in which I would suggest the [[Roam Book Club]] might be improved: 
                    - Being more concrete: Could we set ourselves a more discreet and bounded task, such as writing a review or a critique of a book, which would allow us to both use the power both chrome and settling, but also allow us more easily to Learn from each other and get insight into best practice
                    - Showing our workings: some of the most useful things we have done in bookclub involve people showing how they use these tools and also stepping through use of the tools and processes. I believe there will be value in organising Show and Tells In which people use a mini mini presentation of how they work
                - A small suggestion: I wonder if there would be value in moving chat from Zoom to Roam, perhaps using the #Chat model which was developed, as this would enable us to capture and integrate the chat with our own notes
        - ### [[Group discussion]]
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] Within Roam... 
            - [[Nico Macdonald]] 
                - [[Matt McKinlay]] How do we create an output which is useful to everyone and keep the barrier to entry low? 
            - [[Joey Harris]] A [[Literature Note]] is a very different thing in academia, and [[Fleeting Notes]] are things that you record so you can get them out of your mind. 
            - [[Catherine Rickwood]] Academic writing is not based on a single book but an analysis or critical review or an area and a number of books. 
                - #Chat @[[Catherine Rickwood]] On your point about studying a whole area, I would love to find a way to work with a group reviewing and creating [[Zettels]] for the key literature. So, take an area such as Digital Innovation and collaborate with colleagues to do the literature review. 
                    - #Chat @[[Catherine Rickwood]] Yes, the challenge of agreeing a topic. If we could find a common theme that 5 or 10 people were interested in and would find it value to invest in. I guess something related to innovation would be the centre of the Venn Diagram.
            - Mark M to Everyone (10:23 pm) Yes, how can we output this information to our personal graphs.
                - #Chat @[[Mark M]] There is no easy way to integrate information between graphs, but I believe Roam is working on this. It is a key feature for me, as I want to pull in material from this graph, and also pull material from my private graph into my public graph. 
            - [[Matt McKinlay]] Want to ‘let a 1,000 bookclubs bloom’ but we are not there yet. 
            - [[Henry Finkelstein]] The scope and breadth of the club is stunning, and very international. It is really remarkable to be part of this group. 
    - /Users/nico/Dropbox/Apps/Zoom/2020-12-13 21.54.56 Book Club 83436580997/meeting_saved_chat.txt
