1. #Announcement [*](((gTKDAiQEH)))A [[Meetup]] hosted by [[Matt McKinlay]] today at 8pm PST. 

For new member set up and overview. Join the Zoom [here](https://us02web.zoom.us/j/85386732166?pwd=Q09sK3dLNzZEejZkN0ZkM3NvazJ5QT09)
2. #Announcement [[Matt Brockwell/MJB]] just wanted to make sure everyone knows we are provisionally retiring lower case `# chat` in favor of the new CSS that [[Beau Haan]] developed so please use `# Chat` with a capital `C` henceforth

the tags have been merged so all the old `# chat` tags are still here, they just got capitalized

please use the capital version from now on, followed by your name

conventions still apply: [[Chat guidelines]] - subject-level hashtags encouraged!
3. #Chat [[Justin Johnson]] If we import the entire book into our own Roam database, it seems like we should use namespaces so for example `[[Introduction]]`, isn't completely detached from its association to the book.  Any thoughts on best practices here?  It would also be nice if titles respected the namespace display toggle.  Similar to how Atlassian Confluence spaces get created so that you can have unique page names within them.  Friction in user behavior drives tool usage. I noticed this yesterday when I purchased the first Roam Book and was thinking about how to "safely" import it in my personal graph instead of just another graph dedicated to the book.  It feels like linking between graphs might be a better way to go, but you'd still have to think through the UX for presenting a list of links coming from a different graph.
    - #Reply [[Chinarut]] glad I’m not the only on thinking about this. I agree with thoughts on namespaces - namespaces for graphs might help move towards inter-graph block references.  perhaps a block reference to like @roam-book-club-2/[[Introduction]] while I’m in my private graph?
        - "this brings some #theory to the cost of our personal, private graph being separate from the book club graph and creating a case for linking graphs.  trying to reduce #complexity by siloing individual graphs adds complexity by not enabling book club participants to discover the surprising connections between our private notes and our book club notes #multiplayer #usecase"
4. #Chat [[Justin Johnson]] I'm using Readwise and start with a bunch of highlights getting synced.  Then I am bolding parts of what I highlighted, linking to new pages or existing pages for key terms, and tagging.  Then I'm adding notes under the highlights if I have anything I wanted to expound upon to capture the context that was in my mind when I was motivated to highlight it.  Question.  Is this fleeting notes?  While they do include the citations, they aren't organized under headings like Introduction or Chapter 1, so they just feel like a stream of inspiration or insight I wanted to record in the moment while reading the book.  Anyone else have thoughts on how they've been approaching this?
    - #Chat[[Joshua Gerald Butler]] #Reply[[Justin Johnson]]
        - Ive been using readwise as well, its been really helpful in my general work flow. I would call the notes taken in Readwise Literature notes as they are directly related to what you are reading rather than "reminders of what’s in my head", which are what fleeting notes are supposed to be (if im understanding things properly).
            - #Reply [[Justin Johnson]] I was thinking literature notes would be my elaboration on what the book means in my own words, which would cite my sources but wouldn't just be my highlighted text.  I could just have highlights from my reading with my notes under that with why that was meaningful to me, but it feels like a mix of references and fleeting notes.  I think I need to review the book again.  Perhaps I have in my mind that literature notes are more like a book report where I summarize the book or each section of the book, as opposed to only the parts of the book that are considered meaningful to me?
                - #Reply[[Joshua Gerald Butler]] Yeah, i suppose because you can highlight and add notes in readwise i tend to do my highlighting and making literature notes at the same time, but yeah you are right that the literature notes are not just the highlights, they are the ideas brought up in the text reframed by you the individual.  
                - The book report seems like a good idea, fits with Chapter 5's focus on writing being the end goal. 
    - #Chat [[Justin Johnson]] Does anyone know if there is a way in Readwise to sync highlights within headers for the chapter name?  I have a large list of highlights and am finding it challenging to put them back in their context within the book without opening up kindle repeatedly to see where the highlight came from.  I guess this is related to my question above about understanding how people are saving their highlights and if they are fleeting or literature notes, and if you save both of those in the context of their chapter headings.  I've been enjoying the unstructured notes but if I need to summarize a book within its structure it gets awkward.
        - #Chat[[Joshua Gerald Butler]] #Reply[[Justin Johnson]]
            - I try and make sure to highlight the first sentence of the chapter and write a note associated with that line in readwise that this is the start of the chapter, and then when the readwise highlights and notes are synced with roam, i go into the synced list of highlights, and add a heading block every time a new chapter starts, so it is then more obvious where in the book i am. 
        - #Chat[[Joshua Gerald Butler]] #Reply[[Matthew Vogel]]
            - Yes there is take a look at my [quick-tip here](((wYbEpr79t)))
                - #Chat[[Joshua Gerald Butler]]
                    - Oh great, thanks for the info
5. #Chat [[Siva Arunagiri]] Does anyone else feel like each and every single line in [[How to Take Smart Notes]] has an important point. I feel like I have been highlighting in huge chunks.
    - #Reply [[Nicole Drumhiller]] I think originally when I was highlighting I was trying to remember something important (probably as a result of my undergrad days).
        - However the next step was always missing since I forgot why it was important to me
            -  either confirming or going against a particular argument and such. 
        - This is where turning what you've read into your own words can be immensely helpful, then saving direct quotes sparingly into something like #Zotero.
            - I have used #Zotero for many years now but after reading [[How to Take Smart Notes]] it's changed my approach.
                - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] One solid way that I've approached this idea of notes losing their context is by taking a voice-memo ([[Otter.ai]]) where I can dump my idea in length, so then I have a 2-3 minute recording of exactly all of the process thoughts that I am having at that moment
                    - One note to add, would be to have the "Title" of the voice-memo, contain the `#[[Reference Notes]]`
                - I've used this method rather well, and as trust builds in that process, the idea of quickly turning `#[[Fleeting Notes]]` into `#[[Permanent Notes]]` doesn't have to be rushed, since the idea AND context is captured in amber
                    - #Reply[[Nicole Drumhiller]] That's interesting, I'll have to check that out. Right now I dictate ideas into GoogleDocs (when collaborating) or #Roam. I've found that when time feels fleeting just doing this a few times a day can add up and further enhance a [[Daily writing practice]] 
    - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] When you are highlighting the words, what are the original thoughts that come up for you? How does it resonate with what already interests you? Does it continue, displace, argue, or undermine any of your current beliefs and ideas?
        - #Reply [[Nicole Drumhiller]] I think originally when I was highlighting I was trying to remember something important (probably as a result of my undergrad days).
            - However the next step was always missing since I forgot why it was important to me
                -  either confirming or going against a particular argument and such. 
            - This is where turning what you've read into your own words can be immensely helpful, then saving direct quotes sparingly into something like #Zotero.
                - I have used #Zotero for many years now but after reading [[How to Take Smart Notes]] it's changed my approach.
                    - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] One solid way that I've approached this idea of notes losing their context is by taking a voice-memo ([[Otter.ai]]) where I can dump my idea in length, so then I have a 2-3 minute recording of exactly all of the process thoughts that I am having at that moment
                        - One note to add, would be to have the "Title" of the voice-memo, contain the `#[[Reference Notes]]`
                    - I've used this method rather well, and as trust builds in that process, the idea of quickly turning `#[[Fleeting Notes]]` into `#[[Permanent Notes]]` doesn't have to be rushed, since the idea AND context is captured in amber
                        - #Reply[[Nicole Drumhiller]] That's interesting, I'll have to check that out. Right now I dictate ideas into GoogleDocs (when collaborating) or #Roam. I've found that when time feels fleeting just doing this a few times a day can add up and further enhance a [[Daily writing practice]] 
        - #Reply [[Siva Arunagiri]] I just highlight everything that I feel might be useful. I don’t generally think about the various ideas behind them. If I feel they are important I just highlight them and once I go back through them I add tags to them based on their context. 
    - #Reply [[Kate Foy 🌱]] I wouldn't worry too much about that. Highlight away with whatever sparks a response in you; trust that reaction. I find that there are some sections where only one or two ideas really hit home for me, whilst others contain chunks! I know I am going to go back and process these highlights to synthesise/boil down into my own words as Literature Notes later on. The thing is we are using the book as a guide to find our own way.
        - #Reply [[Siva Arunagiri]] Good point! 
    - #Reply [[Fábio Lopes]]: A few months ago I bought the book and gave it a initial read, stopped and started again for the book club and I already have my mind blown away. Yesterday I think my understanding of the system has improved and I can already grasp better how to make [[Permanent Notes]]. It seems to be all about taking the context of an idea and still make it work for other contexts.
        - My first permanent note (I'm very new to this world of note taking, productivity and so on) was something along the lines that **the process and its refinement is more fun and rewarding than the end result**. And I can apply this to different contexts. If I want to be a better professional, focusing on the process of getting better is much more rewarding than just arriving there. If I want to become rich, focusing on the process to get there is more fun and rewarding than just be given the money. Etc
        - #Reply [[Siva Arunagiri]] Try checking out [Andy Matushchak](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/z4SDCZQeRo4xFEQ8H4qrSqd68ucpgE6LU155C)‘ notes on how to create [[Evergreen Notes]] Good resource to check out. 
            - #Reply [[Fábio Lopes]] Thank you for reminding me of the existence of his notes, I will give it a look after I'm done with reading the book and potentially gain a better grasp of the concepts.
    - #Reply[[Latham Turner]]: I found as I was reading the book and doing the same, that highlighting was a way to feel like I was accomplishing anything without really engaging with the material.  I stopped highlighting and started forcing myself to stop and capture my thoughts even in a fleeting note. I even embedded the quoted part i would have just highlighted, but I already notice I'm recalling the points better than when I was just highlighting.  That insight in itself was worth the price of the book
        - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] This! 👆🏼
6. [[Wade Dominic]]
    - Just went through the links others have shared to something they find interesting. Was super cool. Saved a bunch of them to my personal Roam and also block referenced the ones I liked as sub links in my page on here.
7. #Poll How far is everyone with reading the book? __(move the slider below and your icon will notate your score)__ {{[[slider]]}}
    - #Reply [[Nicole Drumhiller]] I actually had finished it earlier this year but was excited to get into it again and attempt to learn how to use #Roam more effectively.
        - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] Re-reading it really solidified things that stood out from before, but are even more relevant now. I love that!
8. #Poll How far is everyone with the capturing of #[[Fleeting Notes]]? __(entering them into this shared graph)__ {{[[slider]]}}
9. 
