- ## Announcements
- :hiccup [:hr {:style {:border-top "3px solid black"}}]
- #Chat [[Chinarut]] is anyone complete with their literature notes yet? I finally see the light at the end of the tunnel with chap 14 and the afterward remaining (both are super short) Not to scare anyone off - I’ve been tracking my time and it’s been a 16 hour process going through all my fleeting notes (including highlights) with the occasional burst of inspiration to connect back into my personal graph. I will say it is rewarding - it gave me a different mindset while taking notes on an academic paper earlier today I intend to create zettles from.
    - #Reply-from [[Matt McKinlay]] Great Chinarut! Yes it's taking me time too. I am doing them to share with everyone in the Book map page. I want to have them done by this Sunday's live session. Scheduling them regularly every day has helped, and I also starting to record them too.  I feel like this step though has changed my understanding of the book completely though. My fleeting notes were pointless, and actually looking back pretty haphazard interpretations.
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] yeay - I just finished creating my literatures notes - thx 4 the props up 🙌🏻  I can sleep now 😅  Scheduling 2 hrs every day is what worked for me too - it is definitely a discipline. I feel like the more practice we get creating & evolving our notes, the better we fine tune the notes we write in the first place - it’s great you’re noticing too!  Is the [[Book Map]] meant to be a collective contribution?
            - #Reply-from [[Matt McKinlay]] Excellent on 2 hrs a day. I am a big fan of practice as the goal.  For book map- I am going to do them myself, and then people can use them as they want from there, collective in use. Although it is taking me longer than I hoped.. Will get back to it now....
                - 
    - #Reply-from  [[Jason Kleinberg 🎻]]
        - Nice. How are you connecting notes in the book club to notes in the graph?
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] If you mean my personal graph when you say ”in the graph” - I resorted to manually copying literature notes I felt were particularly striking back to my personal graph (it was just 2 or 3)
- #Chat [[Denise Todd]] regarding [[Beau Haan 📌/[[Meetup]]/Week 3/Noon]] and information you requested.  You might remember my problem in understanding what appeared to be the linear nature of your approach.  I suggested that Permanent Notes can be a result of literature notes across various sources and that Literature notes are the source for permanent notes.  You ask me where in the book I read that.  Here are the block references.  Probably just the way I'm interpreting this but the significant phrases are highlighted. 
    - I took some literature notes collecting reasons how and why humans act so very differently when they experience scarcity. This was step one, done with an eye towards the argument of the book. I had questions in mind like: Is this convincing? What methods do they use? Which of the references are familiar? [*](((_uAV-EOTz)))
    - But the first question I asked myself when it came to writing the first permanent note for the slip-box was: What does this all mean for my own research and the questions I think about in my slip-box? This is just another way of asking: Why did the aspects I wrote down catch my interest? [*](((eNwLWd0n0)))
    - If I were a psychologist, this book would interest me for completely different reasons than if I were a politician or a debt adviser, or if I had bought it out of personal interest. As someone with a sociological perspective on political questions and an interest in the project of a theory of society, my first note reads plainly: “Any comprehensive analysis of social inequality must include the cognitive effects of scarcity. Cf. Mullainathan and Shafir 2013.” This immediately triggers further questions, which I can discuss on following notes, starting with: “Why?” [*](((6UwlWjiRr)))
    - Now, I already have two notes in my slip-box, based on the literature notes I took while reading the book, but written along the lines of my own thinking. ^^**One note states the relevance of the book for my own thinking and one explains my idea in more detail. Here I could draw from my literature notes as a source of valuable facts and insight.**^^ Even though the answers to the question of why scarcity is relevant to the study of social inequality are all in the book, they are not just there to be copied. They need to be made explicit. That means to think about how the insight into cognitive effects of scarcity affects the analysis of social inequality. [*](((4vhnaChIV)))
        - #Reply [[Beau Haan 📌]] This video, time-stamped, might illuminate a bit more clearly on what I initially meant during the meetup.
            - {{[[youtube]]: https://youtu.be/eMJGKZ7n9hE?t=403}}
        - It's remembering that the dialogue, or discussion, is meant to be had at the fully functioning `Permanent Note` level, and not in either of the earlier phases
        - As for the linear method in creating a new note that goes into the slip-box, the function of that is highlighted in several [[Sönke Ahrens]] interviews where he explains that the main focus of having such a process, is so that the mechanics can be forgotten about when deciding **where** something is supposed to live, with the writing, thinking, and analysis being the primary focus
            - As for having multiple `Literature Notes` converging into a solid `Permanent Note` it makes me wonder why that discussion isn't happening on the final phase itself?
            - Even if the `Literature Notes` may share similar ideas that point towards the same `Permanent Note` isn't the power of this system in showing that with the nested sequence of `Permanent Notes`?
                - In my experience, the power of the [[Zettelkasten]] comes when I can see how my notes that have been turned into Zettels, begin to add, subtract, support, or negate my other Zettels
                    - With the thoroughly examined, then decided upon, nested sequence being the actual conversation 
    - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] huh - I really hadn’t given much consideration to whether a permanent note drawing on literature notes across multiple sources. In the passage you highlighted, I’m under the impression he develops a permanent note from his literatures from one book. He ends up creating a 2nd permanent note to elaborate on the idea in more detail, thus starting his first line of thinking. [[@[[Denise Todd]]]]
        - #reply-to [[Chinarut]] from [[Denise Todd]} From other sections of the book I'm left with the strong impression that permanent notes are more likely derived from several literature notes across different books.  Thus the importance of taking into consideration Permanent notes already written.   I too noted how the 2nd (and other future related notes) expand on the idea.  
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] ok I can’t claim to speak intelligently to this as I have yet to craft my first permanent note. From the example in the quotes above, he crafts his first note from one source (Cf. Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). It’s probably best to revisit this once we’ve crafted a set of permanent notes from Sonke’s book.
- #Chat [[Matt McKinlay]]
    - A great detailed overview of [[Niklas Luhmann]]'s [[Zettelkasten]] method worth reading [here](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/nachlass/zettelkasten)
        - #Reply-from[[Yingyue Liu]]Thank you! It's in German. With the help of Google Translate, I can read some. I hope someday, I could understand the videos.
        - #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] I noticed that too & actually pretty impressed w the quality of German translation these days! sent it to my friend in Germany so she has a better handle on what we are working on!
- #[[Daily Writing Prompt]]"What challenges are you having in contributing to the shared graph?"
    1. 
    2. #Reply-from [[Chinarut]] keeping tabs on replies. Conversations around block references is really ingenious (and elegant in its own way) and at the same time, I see the simplicity of block replies on a prompt (such as this question) in daily notes (or our help page) for beginners. I participated in Slack early on and staying in Roam and is definitely the way to go. I love how we’re able to be with the growing pains of figuring things out on the fly as we go! [[nature of experimentation]]
