- About Me:: I am a computer science PhD student at University of Bath. My research area is reinforcement learning (an approach to artificial intelligence). 

I was thrilled to discover the Zettelkasten method, and am keen to build a habit of using it for my research.
- Favourite books:: How to Take Smart Notes, Prometheus Rising, The Alchemist, The Power of Now, 1984.
- Link to something you find interesting:: [Learning to Summarize
with Human Feedback](https://openai.com/blog/learning-to-summarize-with-human-feedback/)
- How to Take Smart Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - write your notes here 
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - write your notes here 
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - write your notes here 
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - etc 
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
    - [[Afterword]]
- Fleeting Notes:: 
    - ^^We will not be guided by a blindly made-up plan picked from our unreliable brains, but by our interest, curiosity and intuition, which is formed and informed by the actual work of reading, thinking, discussing, writing and developing ideas – and is something that continuously grows and reflects our knowledge and understanding externally. (Page 48)^^
    - ^^Feedback loops are not only crucial for the dynamics of motivation, but also the key element to any learning process. Nothing motivates us more than the experience of becoming better at what we do. And the only chance to improve in something is getting timely and concrete feedback. Seeking feedback, not avoiding it, is the first virtue of anyone who wants to learn, or in the more general terms of psychologist Carol Dweck, to grow. (Page 53)^^
    - ^^The good news is that we can train ourselves to stay focused on one thing for longer if we avoid multitasking, remove possible distractions and separate different kinds of tasks as much as possible so they will not interfere with each other. This too is not just a question of having the right mindset, but, equally important, of how we organise our workflow. A lack of structure makes it much more challenging to stay focused for extended periods of time. The slip-box provides not only a clear structure to work in, but also forces us to shift our attention consciously as we can complete tasks in reasonable time before moving on to the next one. (Page 60)^^
        - **Note**: To engage in focused, deep work discipline is important, but having the right workflow is important too. Consciously choosing to direct attention, in the right workflow, prevents the fatigue from multitasking (attention residue).
    - ^^If we proofread a manuscript and don't manage to get enough distance from ourselves as authors, we will only see our thoughts, not the actual text. (Page 61)^^
        - **Note**: Always have to ask: is this writing understandable to someone else? Have I explained clearly what I mean?
    - ^^We need to get our thoughts on paper first and improve them there, where we can look at them. Especially complex ideas are difficult to turn into a linear text in the head alone. If we try to please the critical reader instantly, our workflow would come to a standstill. We tend to call extremely slow writers, who always try to write as if for print, perfectionists. Even though it sounds like praise for extreme professionalism, it is not: A real professional would wait until it was time for proofreading, so he or she can focus on one thing at a time. While proofreading requires more focused attention, finding the right words during writing requires much more floating attention. (Page 62)^^
    - ^^Psychologists used to associate scientific work exclusively with focussed attention, while other, more floating kinds of attention were exclusively associated with creative work like art.
We know today that we need both kinds of attention for art and science. It is not surprising, therefore, that this flexibility can be found among most, if not all, exceptional scientists. Oshin Vartanian compared and analysed the daily workflows of Nobel Prize winners and other eminent scientists and concluded that it is not a relentless focus, but flexible focus that distinguishes them. “Specifically, the problem-solving behavior of eminent scientists can alternate between extraordinary levels of focus on specific concepts and playful exploration of ideas. This suggests that successful problem solving may be a function of flexible strategy application in relation to task demands." (Vartanian 2009, 57) (Page 63)^^
        - **Note**: Diffuse mode thinking, forming links freely.
    - ^^Unfortunately, the most common way people organise their writing is by making plans. Although planning is almost universally recommended by study guides, it's the equivalent of putting oneself on rails.
Don't make plans. Become an expert. (Page 64)^^
        - **Note**: Write, and process ideas, as you go.
    - ^^Experts rely on embodied experience, which enables them to reach the state of virtuosity. An expert in academic writing has a feel for the process, an acquired intuition for which task will bring one closer to the finished manuscript and what is only a distraction. There can be no universally applicable rule about which step has to be taken when. (Page 65)^^
        - **Note**: Academic research, of which writing is a part of it, is an art.
    - ^^Luhmann describes this step as follows: "I always have a slip of paper at hand, on which I note down the ideas of certain pages. On the backside I write down the bibliographic details. After finishing the book I go through my notes and think how these notes might be relevant for already written notes in the slip-box. It means that I always read with an eye towards possible connections in the slip-box." (Page 76)^^
        - **Note**: After making literatute notes, compare them with what’s in the slip-box, to write more connected permanent notes.
    - ^^You need to take some form of literature note that captures your understanding of the text, so you have something in front of your eyes while you are making the slip-box note. But don't turn it into a project in itself. Literature notes are short and meant to help with writing slip-box notes. Everything else either helps to get to this point or is a distraction. (Page 78)^^
    - ^^Extracting the gist of a text or an idea and giving an account in writing is for academics what daily practice on the piano is for pianists: The more often we do it and the more focused we are, the more virtuous we become. (Page 82)^^
        - **Note**: Ideas in the written word take up a lot more space than they need to. Writers elaborate, use stories and analogies. One can practice efficiently extracting the key ideas, which serve as the foundation for permanent notes.
    - ^^While it is obvious that familiarity is not understanding, we have no chance of knowing whether we understand something or just believe we understand something until we test ourselves in some form. If we don't try to verify our understanding during our studies, we will happily enjoy the feeling of getting smarter and more knowledgeable while in reality staying as dumb as we were. This warm feeling disappears quickly when we try to explain what we read in our own words in writing. (Page 86)^^
        - **Note**: Recognition/familiarity of what we read does not equal recollection or understanding. Writing, following reformulating the ideas clearly in our minds, is deliberate practice.
    - ^^There is a clear division of labour between the brain and the slip-box: The slip-box takes care of details and references and is a long-term memory resource that keeps information objectively unaltered. That allows the brain to focus on the gist, the deeper understanding and the bigger picture, and frees it up to be creative. Both the brain and the slip-box can focus on what they are best at. (Page 90)^^
        - **Note**: Slip-box is backup memory the brain can rely on. The brain is then in a state where it never has to stress about remembering long ago considered ideas or references : they have been accounted for. More energy and time for creative thinking, fresh understanding.
    - ^^Lonka recommends what Luhmann recommends: Writing brief accounts on the main ideas of a text instead of collecting quotes. And she also stresses that it is no less important to do something with these ideas - to think hard about how they connect with other ideas from different contexts and could inform questions that are not already the questions of the author of the l respective text.

This is exactly what we do when we take the next step, in which we write and add permanent notes to the slip-box. We don't just play with ideas in our heads, but do something with them in a very concrete way: We think about what they mean for other lines of thoughts, then we write this explicitly on paper and connect them literally with the other notes. (Page 91)^^
        - **Note**: Connecting ideas relevant to us. Literature notes are small thoughts on direct excerpts, but processed in our own words. Then, writing permanent notes solidifies the ideas by extracting the main points and linking them to others we know. What does this new idea add, what further questions does it raise?
    - ^^Coherent arguments require the language to be fixed, and only if something is written down is it fixed enough to be discussed independently from the author. The brain alone is too eager to make us feel good - even if it is by ignoring inconsistencies in our thinking. Only in the written form can an argument be looked at with a certain distance – literally. We need this distance to think about an argument – otherwise the argument itself would occupy the mental resources we need for scrutinizing it. (Page 94)^^
        - **Note**: Craft and iterate on arguments by viewing them objectively. Editing is a different task to generating.
    - ^^But the first question I asked myself when it came to writing the first permanent note for the slip-box was: What does this all mean for my own research and the questions I think about in my slip-box? This is just another way of asking: Why did the aspects I wrote down catch my interest? (Page 97)^^
        - **Note**: The literature or fleeting notes are captured for some reason (they speak to our own unique interests). When starting to make permanent notes, look to tease out why they’re relevant to us.
    - ^^Just by writing down these questions and making possible connections explicit in writing are the concepts and theories being investigated. Their limitations become as visible as their particular angle on a problem. By explicitly writing down how something connects or leads to something else, we force ourselves to clarify and distinguish ideas from each other. (Page 98)^^
        - **Note**: Pages 97-98 are very good and worth revisiting; they describe a concrete example of the workflow of generating permanent notes following having made literature notes. Permanent notes needn’t be thoroughly researched, indisputable claims of truth. They can be just the beginnings of a question, serving to link one idea to another and stimulate further writing or trigger new research questions. Attempting some external thinking, and so having some even half-complete notes down in the slip-box is better than nothing. Everything is a work in progress, and is to be cultivated like a garden.
    - ^^When he confronted Shereshevsky with what seemed to him like lazy behaviour, Shereshevsky started to recount every single word that was spoken during the meeting and continued to recount verbatim all the meetings they had ever had. His colleagues were astonished, but the person most astonished was Shereshevsky himself. It was the first time he realised that everyone else seemed to have forgotten almost everything. Even those who had taken notes couldn't remember even a fraction of what seemed normal for him. (Page 99)^^
        - **Note**: Solomon Shereshevsky, great example of what the human mind is capable of. How can these feats of recollection by partially recovered, or trained for?
    - ^^What does help for true, useful learning is to connect a piece of information to as many meaningful contexts as possible, which is what we do when we connect our notes in the slip-box with other notes. Making these connections deliberately means building up a self-supporting network of interconnected ideas and facts that work reciprocally as cues for each other. (Page 103)^^
        - **Note**: Retrieval of memory depends on the right cue. To ensure something we want to remember has a good chance of being recalled, making many links in the slip-box provides us with numerous cues / associations / perspectives.
    - ^^The challenge of writing as well as learning is therefore not so much to learn, but to understand, as we will already have learned what we understand. The problem is that the meaning of something is not always obvious and needs to be explored. That is why we need to elaborate on it. But elaboration is nothing more than connecting information to other information in a meaningful way. The first step of elaboration is to think enough about a piece of information so we are able to write about it. The second step is to think about what it means for other contexts as well. (Page 104)^^
        - **Note**: How do you understand? You need to link new data to what you already know; to forge links. This is done by elaborating on the material, and putting down our own thoughts for how it links to what we already know.
    - ^^"Every note is just an element in the network of references and back references in the system, from which it gains its quality." (Luhmann 1992) (Page 107)^^
        - **Note**: A note really only means something by the contexts in which it sits.
    - ^^Because the slip-box is not intended to be an encyclopaedia, but a tool to think with, we don't need to worry about completeness. We don't need to write anything down just to bridge a gap in a note sequence. We only write if it helps us with our own thinking. The gaps we do need to concern ourselves with are the gaps in the arguments in the final manuscript - but these gaps will only become obvious in the next step, when we take the relevant notes for an argument out of the network of the slip-box and sort them into the linear order for the rough draft. (Page 108)^^
        - **Note**: (Permanent) notes do not need to be an exhaustive coverage of all points/ideas needed to form an argument for an area. The zettelkasten needn’t resemble an encyclopaedia in terms of completeness. What’s there helps us with our thinking. If we link two notes, and our thinking would benefit from an additional note that helps explain the link, we write it. Otherwise, further elaboration to *fill in the gaps* is left until the output stage: writing the draft from notes.
    - ^^As an extension of our own memory, the slip-box is the medium we think in, not something we think about. The note sequences are the clusters where order emerges from complexity. We extract information from different linear sources and mix it all up and shake it until new patterns emerge. Then, we form these patterns into new linear
change texts. (Page 108)^^
        - **Note**: Thinking needlessly about how the zettelkasten is ordered misses the point. It doesn’t need a managed top-down structure. Maintaining an index page that captures everything perfectly is not the idea. Index pages help as aids to guide our thinking into areas of the slip-box, but are not there to try to capture much structure. The structure of the system emerges bottom-up, from the links between notes.
    - ^^Luhmann would add the number of one or two (rarely more) notes next to a keyword in the index (Schmidt 2013, 171). The reason he was so economical with notes per keyword and why we too should be very selective lies in the way the slip-box is used. Because it should not be used as an archive, where we just take out what we put in, but as a system to think with, the references between the notes are much more important than the references from the index to a single note. (Page 109)^^
        - **Note**: Again, indexes are only for light access into the web of thoughts that is the zettelkasten. They must provide only one or two entry points to a particular topic, allowing the path of thought to emerge spontaneously from there. They are not to be catch-all maps of the slip-box.
    - ^^The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it? The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it?
It is a crucial difference. (Page 110)^^
    - ^^Keywords should always be assigned with an eye towards the topics you are working on or interested in, never by looking at the note in isolation. This is also why this process cannot be automated or delegated to a machine or program – it requires thinking. (Page 111)^^
    - ^^The brain is very good at making associations and spotting patterns and similarities between seemingly different things and also very good in spotting differences between seemingly similar things, but it needs to have them presented objectively and externally. It is much easier to see differences and similarities than to detect them by mere thinking. (Page 116)^^
        - **Note**: Have something in front of you to really think precisely and accurately.
    - ^^The slip-box not only confronts us with dis-confirming information, but also helps with what is known as the __feature-positive__ effect (Allison and Messick 1988; Newman, Wolff, and Hearst 1980; Sainsbury 1971). This is the phenomenon in which we tend to overstate the importance of information that is (mentally) easily available to us and tilts our thinking towards the host recently acquired facts, not necessarily the most relevant ones. (Page 117)^^
        - **Note**: The slip-box broadens our scope for thought beyond what lies in working memory, at the top of our minds.
    - ^^To have concrete notes in front of our eyes and be able to compare them directly makes differences, even small ones, much easier to spot. 
...
The neurobiologist James Zull points out that *comparing* is our natural form of perception, where our cognitive interpretation is  in lockstep with our actual eye movements.
...
This is one of the reasons why thinking works so much better when we have the very things we think about in front of our eyes. It is in our nature. (Page 122)^^
        - **Note**: Our brains are tailored to spotting visual differences - to compare. Getting the material for thinking in front of you makes the intellectual work so much easier to do.
    - ^^To be able to play with ideas, we first have to liberate them from their original context by means of abstraction and re-specification, We did this when we took literature notes and translated them into the different contexts within the slip-box. (Page 123)^^
        - **Note**: Ideas are synthesisable, and may be played with, only after they have been crystallized down to their core meaning and translated into our own personal language.
    - ^^Another piece of advice is not a feature of the slip-box and might sound banal, but it is crucial: Make sure that you really see what you think you see and describe it as plainly and factually as possible. Double-check if necessary. That this isn't as obvious as it sounds will become clearer by the fact that the ability to truly see what is in front of one’s eyes is often listed as a trait of experts. And that is easily explained by the fact that our perception does not follow the order of seeing first and interpreting second. It does both at the same time: We always perceive something as something - our interpretation is instantaneous. (Page 125)^^
        - **Note**: Always try to perceive data/ ideas clearly. Our brains jump to conclusions quickly. We need to make efforts to build better maps, whilst still remembering that the map is not the territory.
    - ^^One of the most famous figures to illustrate this skill is the mathematician Abraham Wald (Mangel and Samaniego 1984).

During World War II, he was asked to help the Royal Air Force find the areas on their planes that were most often hit by bullets so they could cover them with more armour. But instead of counting the bullet holes on the returned planes, he recommended armouring the spots where none of the planes had taken hits. The RAF forgot to take into account what was not there to see: All the planes that didn't make it back. (Page 126)^^
        - **Note**: The skill referred to is one of not jumping to conclusions and instead trying to see what's actually there, not what one expects to be there. The story is a classic example of survivorship bias.
    - ^^Problems rarely get solved directly, anyway. Most often, the crucial step forward is to redefine the problem in such a way that an already existing solution can be employed. The first question should always be directed towards the question itself: What kind of answer can you expect from asking a question in this particular way? What is missing? (Page 128)^^
        - **Note**: Reshaping a problem can often allow existing solutions to fit it. We can survey the parameters of the problem ; this is like assessing how the problem relates to the adjacent possible.
    - ^^Simple ideas can be tied together into consistent theories and build up enormous complexity. This just doesn't work with complicated ideas. By using the slip-box on a daily basis, we train these important intellectual skills deliberately: We check if what we understood from a text is really in the text by having our understanding in written form in front of our eyes. We learn to focus on the gist of an idea by restricting ourselves in terms of space. We can make it a habit to always think about what is missing when we write down our own ideas. And we can practice asking good questions when we sort our notes into the slip-box and connect them with other notes. (Page 129)^^
        - **Note**: We need to take simple ideas seriously, and honour them as the currency of progress. Complicated ideas lack sharpness. Simple ideas are better maps of the territory. Imagine trying to build up maths without solid axioms.
    - ^^By generating questions in the course of our everyday work, we bring the law of large numbers on our side. The truth is that few questions are suitable to be answered within an article, a thesis or a book. Some are too broad, some are too narrow, some are impossible to answer with knowledge we can reasonably acquire, but for most, we just don't have the material to work with. (Page 135)^^
        - **Note**: Taking smart notes accumulates our own material that can later aid writing.
    - ^^Remember: Luhmann's answer to the question of how one person could be so productive was that he never forced himself to do anything and only did what came easily to him. "When I am stuck for one moment, I leave it and do something else." When he was asked what else he did when he was stuck, his answer was: “Well, writing other books. I always work on different manuscripts at the same time. With this method, to work on different things simultaneously, I never encounter any mental blockages." (Page 141)^^
        - **Note**: Luhmann procrastinated productively, working on multiple projects at the same time, and switching wherever one stalled.
    - ^^Learning, thinking and writing should not be about accumulating knowledge, but about becoming a different person with a different way of thinking. This is done by questioning one's own thinking routines in the light of new experiences and facts. (Page 150)^^
        - **Note**: The purpose of learning is to develop the personality. We do this by questioning and comparing how new information fits into out model of reality. The slip-box aids this integration of new information.
- Literature Notes::
- **Live sessions:**
    - [[Book Club Live Session 1]]
        - [[Goal]]
            - Well the main goal for me is to gain a visceral understanding of how to practically maintain a zettelkasten in Roam. I will then be able to make it a habit, and get the full benefit of Roam as a 'second brain'.
                - What does the workflow look like?
                    - How do I divide my time?
                    - What other tools do I use, if any, to capture raw source material.
            - I would like to see many diverse examples of zettels
            - I want to learn how to explore the zettelkasten for stimulating new ideas
            - It would be really good to get to know people that want to use Roam and zettelkasten for organising mathematical content
            - Have a deeper appreciation for subtle points in Sönke's book that I might have missed during the first read.
                - Knowing really well the details of the method will make implementing it easier.
            - Lose the collector's fallacy and become a fearless creator!
