- Name:: Rahul Prakash
- Breakout Group Number - X
(fill this in for your X!)
    - Who was in this group on 11.1.20::
    - What did your group talk about?::
    - Any questions for the book club as a whole?::
    - Our group question for Sönke Ahrens::
(#[[question for Soenke]])
- Website:: rahulprakash.blog
- Company:: optional, delete otherwise
- Live Session Notes
    - Session 4
        - Pick from the prompts below and write in your own page for 15 minutes. [*](((b6b6xyeKF)))
            - Reflect on the book.  What are you impressions?  [*](((iZsTZyr3i)))
                - The book is easy read. However it takes quite a bit of effort to understand the actual note taking process. The flow of the overarching note taking process could have been better explained. Perhaps some illustrations or diagrams.
            - Reflect on literature notes- useful? Did they help you understand the book in a different way?  [*](((I1HxFz57Q)))
                - Very useful. My literature notes end up being summary in my own words and also notes on what I am thinking about the idea being presented. it certainly helped with a deeper understanding of the concepts as opposed to if I had just read through the book. I think it will also help remember the ideas better.
            - "Reflect on the work and timeline- has it been easy/hard to get through the phases so far? "
                - I am lagging behind in reading. But that is probably a function of the time available to me to to read through the book. Also taking literature notes as summary adds to the time. But that's for a greater good. I could read the book faster but will forget it all in a week with no way to easily reference any idea that I want to revisit - that I might actually remember. The only option would be to scan and  search through the book and re-read. That will be time consuming in itself. So, overall it's ok. I'll try to catch up by spending more time reading the book
            - "How is your progress towards your initial goals? Or have they changed?"
                - No goals are same i.e. trying to really understand what permanent notes are all about and what workflow do people use to create them so that it might spark some ideas for me.
            - "Explore the concept of permanent notes/zettels."
                - "Explain what a permanent note is in your own words?"
                    - Permanent note is a note in which an idea is presented after consulting similar ideas that were discovered in a different context. Permanent note is also easily understandable when you read it because all the needed context is right there. It is written in a final draft format so that minor editing is needed if it needs to be used again.
                - "What is holding you back from creating zettels?"
                    - Never done it. Not sure how to do it. I might actually already be creating zettles in literature notes for all I know. In context of just this book, I am not sure what would be a permanent note since permanent notes are brought up after idea-sex from different contexts. And here there is no other context to look at. It's just the context of this book. And that is nothing but literature notes.
                - "What are you unsure about? "
                    - In context of this book, how to make permanent notes when there are no other contexts available for the ideas.
            - "Do you have any questions for [[Sönke Ahrens]]?"
    - Session 7
        - "You start a conversation with a stranger in the street. They ask you what is a Zettelkasten. What do you say? "
            - Zettlekasten is my system to think effectively
        - "Reflect on your reading and writing habit through Book Club. Did the emphasis and exploration of Sonke's book change your reading and writing habits?"
            - Yes. Absolutely. I now read to understand and NOT to remember, which is what I used to do earlier. And I don't read without writing.
        - "The book promotes a bottom up approach to note taking, which we have used in Book Club. Reflect on this. How did this feel? "
            - I haven't fully formulated my process yet so can't say for sure. But this certainly seems more effective than me highlighting and underlining and forgetting soon after.
        - "What's your favourite blocks (or quotes) from the book?"
            - Oh so many. I'll have to go through and inventory. 
- Fleeting Notes:: 
    - Sonke talk:
        - Treat the zettlekasten as a dialogue partner
        - He discourages from highlighting while reading
- Literature Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
        - Highlights & Annotations
            - "Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long-and short-term interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success. This is where the organization of writing and note-taking comes into play."
            - 
        - Summary
            - Writing is how all work should be done. We don't take note of it because, like breathing, we do it all the time.
            - Smart notes will always give you a starting point. No blank screen. No writers block.
            - Everybody writes. For different reasons. It all starts with a note
            - Writing is taken for granted. Like breathing. We talk about writing only in case of big writing moments
            - Most of our writing is note taking. Yet no one gives guidance about it
            - Help for writing is asked only for deadlines or blank screen. Not for everyday note taking. Because nothing bad happens right away if you take bad notes.
            - This book helps you understand that writing starts before the blank screen. You write interconnected notes as you go through your life and then use them to work on a writing project.
            - Myth of the blank page: Good writing is good note taking and not keeping ideas in your  head expecting them to show up when you start the writing project.
            - All the writing is done even before the decision on topic is made
            - Self-discipline and not IQ is a better measure of academic success. And self-discipline is not easy to achieve. Will power doesn't help either.
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
        - Intro + 1.1
            - Highlights & Annotations
                - "“I never force myself to do anything I don’t feel like. Whenever I am stuck, I do something else.” A good structure allows you to do that, to move seamlessly from one task to another–without threatening the whole arrangement or losing sight of the bigger picture."
                    - __That would be the ultimate place to be in. To do what you like, and reject what you don't. I guess procrastination will not be a thing. And time just flies by. Wonder if such a state can be reached in knowledge work. What surely would help is if you are the master of your own time. And not needing to tow the company line.__
                - "By breaking down the amorphous task of “writing a paper” into small and clearly separated tasks, you can focus on one thing at a time, complete each in one go and move on to the next one"
                    - __And this part I have experienced myself as part of the work gym cycles. Everything becomes so much more easier if broken down into next steps. And it is basic tenet of project management and even TRO talks about it that most of the things that we are to do are not tasks but projects, and it makes sense to just break them down further into actionable tasks instead of finished products. Use verbs to describe the tasks and only nouns to describe work products.__
                - "A good, structured workflow puts us back in charge and increases our freedom to do the right thing at the right time."
                    - __Now I am really curious as to what is the suggested structured workflow in this book. And workflow for what? Idea generation? Or for written articles?__
                - "Having a clear structure to work in is completely different from making plans about something. If you make a plan, you impose a structure on yourself; it makes you inflexible."
                    - __Oh my, the story of my life. And I hate it. But then I am confused about what is the difference between "structure to work" and "making plans"? Maybe you don't define a timeline and the time is not a factor. A parallel to this is how I travel. Without a plan. But a structure? Not really sure. But it is certainly a great experience. And liberating and enjoyable and rejuvenating. Instead of constricting and feeling like a chore. Would be great if I can replicate this in my studying and research and writing. Then life could be so blissful.__
                - "Having read more does not automatically mean having more ideas."
                - "The principle of [[GTD]] is to collect everything that needs to be taken care of in one place and process it in a standardised way. This doesn’t necessarily mean that we actually do everything we once intended to do, but it forces us to make clear choices and regularly check if our tasks still fit into the bigger picture."
                    - __I need to remember and understand this because I struggle with the idea that everything that has been collected for some reason needs to be done. And of course there is way less time available than what is needed to do all of them. And typically it leaves me feeling anxious about not finishing the things that I set out to do. Not being as productive as I intend to be. Or not having as much self control as I should have. I need different metrics for evaluating myself__
                - "Only if nothing else is lingering in our working memory and taking up valuable mental resources can we experience what Allen calls a “mind like water”-the state where we can focus on the work right in front of us without getting distracted by competing thoughts. The principle is simple but holistic. It is not a quick fix or a fancy tool. It doesn’t do the work for you. But it does provide a structure for our everyday work that deals with the fact that **most distractions do not come so much from our environment, but our own minds**."
                    - __This is very insightful and so true. And we keep blaming all the other factors. Even though they are to be blamed, but not always so. Most of the time it is the internal mind that is restless. Wanting to be somewhere else than here and now. Some of it would be triggered by the fact that we are forcing ourselves to do things that we are not wanting to do, like when we procrastinate and then guilt ourselves into doing that task. And some of it is triggered by the fact that we are choosing to do tasks that do not fit our context (environment, energy & available time). And then much of it is because of internally triggered distractions because we are just holding too much in our heads__
                - "Writing is not a linear process."
                    - __And it is also an intermittent process. At least the ideas to write about. In normal writing process, it is taken for granted that idea generation and writing are activities to be done together. You sit down to think and you write. At least that's how I visualize it. Whereas ides come to me as I am living my life. What I need instead is an ability to capture the ideas when they are coming to me. Ability to connect them together. And later on, write - if there's enough body on a specific idea.__
                - "Even the best tools won’t make much of a difference if they are used in isolation."
                - "He soon developed new categories of these notes. He realised that one idea, one note was only as valuable as its context, which was not necessarily the context it was taken from"
                    - This has been one of the most important learnings for me from this book. And it also gives the birth to the idea of atomic notes. More atomic they are, more portable they will be into a new context. And become more notable. In case of Roam research, each of the blocks should support an idea. So, each block becomes a note card from Luhmann
                - "Even hard work can be fun as long as it is aligned with our intrinsic goals and we feel in control. The problems arise when we set up our work in such an inflexible way that we can’t adjust it when things change and become arrested in a process that seems to develop a life of its own."
                    - __suffering porn as Nat Eliason put it. __
                - "Studies on highly successful people have proven again and again that success is not the result of strong willpower and the ability to overcome resistance, but rather the result of smart working environments that avoid resistance in the first place"
                    - __I wonder how do they do these studies. This all just seems to fantastical__
                - 
            - Summary
                - You will learn tools of note-taking and how to implement a workflow with good structure to make learning and inquiry a pleasure instead of  a chore
                - A good structure is trustworthy, freeing you to focus on ideas. It breaks down project into tasks and enables you to enter flow state
                - We have so much freedom to chose yet find ourselves struggling  with procrastination. It is not for availability of good ideas but for the use of bad ways of working. The way of working takes the power away from us to be free in our explorations.
                - Having a structure is different than making a plan. Using a plan forces us into things that we don't want and is demotivating and unsuitable for open ended inquiry. We should build our structure in such a way that idea generation becomes the primary driver.
                - Planner vs Expert. Grade chasers vs learners. Studying as a chore vs studying for joy
                - Good students seem to struggle more because they want to express themselves correctly, understand first ideas are never the best and they have to manage more information because they read more and look beyond the immediate and find more diverse ideas. They will be helped by a system that can keep track of all their information for idea sex.
                - Poor students are more confident in their abilities as they only work within the confines of what they are told to do and not stretch the limits and thus exposing them to confusion of heterogenous ideas.
                - Because good students know so much since they stretch themselves in their inquiry - they fall to imposter syndrome
                - The intention of smart notes is to collect thoughts, make connections and spark new ideas. In trying to reduce complexity of their notes, people try to organize them. This structuring comes in the way of achieving the goal of smart notes. Don't trade-off usability with usefulness of your notes. 
                - You best deal with complexity by keeping things simple, but follow a few rules. The simplicity allows for complexity to develop in the ideas.
                    - __I am not really sure what this really means__
                - To start taking smart notes, the only changes needed are to understand some principles and change the way you take notes. And a few free software programs.
                - Only two ideas need to be combined to implement smart notes system. First is the slip box technique. And second is a change in daily routine to make the slip-box effective. Initially you will tend to slip into old habits but once you get used to the new way of doing things, it will start feeling normal. Setup routines for yourself. A workflow.
                - Overarching workflow is very important to be used. We learn this from David Allen and success of GTD. GTD can't be automatically used for writing. Insightful writing needs a looser structure than GTD requires. What GTD does teach us is to be holistic in designing our workflow. Tools used in isolation will not be useful.
                - The GTD equivalent for open ended process of learning, thinking and writing is the slip-box
                - 1.2
                    - Niklas Luhmann did normal work during the day and pursued his interest in the evening
                    - He made notes like we normally do
                    - The normal notetaking was not taking him anywhere. So he started creating notes on note cards and giving them a reference number. And storing them in the slip box. One idea per note.
                    - He realized that each idea was useful based on the context which could be different from the context where it was discovered. And he started to see how each idea would relate to other contexts. And this started helping him develop his thoughts further.
                        - __So, in case of Roam each block is an idea and each backlink is a context. I think the way to make it work is that I should click on a backlink i.e. enter the context, go and see what other ideas are showing up in linked references of the backlink (that is the context). And then try and see how does this idea relate to any of the linked references and does that spark a new idea.__
                    - He submitted his thoughts to one of the leading professors of the time and was invited to be a professor even though he did not have proper qualifications
                    - Luhmann decided to take on the challenge and completed all the required coursework to become a professor, using his slipbox
                    - through his academic career he was a very prolific and influential author. He got more publications done after his death than most people do in their lives.
                    - unlike most academicians who try to milk one idea for multiple publications, he seems to try and stuff large number of ideas in a small piece.
                    - despite this prolificity he did not need any external help
                    - He was very open about the use of his slip box. And attributed much of his prolificity to the use of the slip box. but most people did not look closely into how he used it
                    - He was productive without putting in too much effort and doing only what he like to do
                    - no one seemed to believe him until now. primarily because it is difficult to imagine work being fun. and the belief that great output has to be an outcome of hard work. not realizing that changing our way of working just a little bit could have such a big impact. work can be fun if it aligns to our goals and we feel that we are in control of what we want to do.
                    - the best way to be in control of our work is to stay flexible and allow for new ideas to emerge. especially in writing that is based on new insight
                    - lumen was successful because the structure of his working and the environment allowed for flexibility. studies of highly successful people show us That success is not a factor of strong willpower but of a smart work environment. the right work environment let's you develop the right workflow. the important thing is to have the right tools and know how to use them.
                    - 
                    - 
        - 1.2 - The Slip-box
            - Highlights & Annotations
                - Instead of adding notes to existing categories or the respective texts, he wrote them all on small pieces of paper, put a number in the corner and collected them in one place: the slip-box. [*](((r6KEY5ijJ)))
                    - __That one small piece of paper seems like an equivalent of one block in Roam. And that one number in the corner seems like the identifier for the block. So as far as I am concerned in Roam each of the blocks is in North card in the slip box__
                - 
            - Summary
        - Highlights + Annotations
            - 1.3
                - Whenever he read something, he would write the bibliographic information on one side of a card and make brief notes about the content on the other side. [*](((nN5f1vjN_)))
                    - __This seems like reading through the text and highlighting+annotating with whatever thoughts are coming to my mind at the time of reading. And maybe this also included summarization in his own words. The bibliography would be the header portion of the Roam page giving the details of the source that I am reading like book title, author etc. If this was to be truly replicated in roam, it would mean all writing done on the daily page. For every highlight+annotation create one block and bibliography information repeated with every block. But we are in a digital world now and we don't have to repeat the bibliography information. We can create a container for the bibliography and put all the highlights+annotations & summarizations in that container__
                - In a second step, shortly after, he would look at his brief notes and think about their relevance for his own thinking and writing.  [*](((55MjPqvfQ)))
                    - __This seems equivalent to reading through highlights + annotations or summary and deciding what words to back link. And then go ahead and create the back link__
                - He then would turn to the main slip-box and write his ideas, comments and thoughts on new pieces of paper, using only one for each idea and restricting himself to one side of the paper, to make it easier to read them later without having to take them out of the box. He kept them usually brief enough to make one idea fit on a single sheet, but would sometimes add another note to extend a thought. [*](((55MjPqvfQ)))
                    - __And this seems to be, clicking the backlink, examining how the idea agrees with or contrasts to the same idea showing up in different contexts i.e. linked references. This could bring up a new idea i.e Idea+ which is written in the main body of the page - one idea per block (And if you are really ambitious, by comparing it to unlinked references)__
                - He usually wrote his notes with an eye towards already existing notes in the slip-box.  [*](((zt7lrN7X2)))
                    - __This is idea sex. And this is where linked references in roam shine. Linked references will help keep an "eye towards already existing notes" even though my brain has totally forgotten about ideas that came way in the past. Brings down the burden on my brain and yet helps keep idea sex going__
                - And while the notes on the literature were brief, he wrote them with great care, not much different from his style in the final manuscript: in full sentences and with explicit references to the literature from which he drew his material. [*](((zt7lrN7X2)))
                    - __From a writing perspective, this is like writing all the time but with no end in mind. Once there is a collection of ideas large enough I can think about creating an outline and voila an almost ready manuscript is ready - because care had been taken to write permanent notes as finished product. I should note that he had references also built into this writing which I currently don't do. If I keep the references, then the citations would be easy to handle too. Roam's block references and alias functionality are going to be really useful for this.__
                - 
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
        - Highlights + Annotations
            - Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. [*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))
                - __I wonder if most blog writers including me miss this point. The point is to focus on thinking and coming up with new ideas.__
            - If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head.  [*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))
                - __I can certainly corroborate to that from school days. Writing something down was certainly more effective in memory. And using my own words to write it down made for better understanding. But, it just felt like such a time consuming process that I stopped doing it as I thought it was just inefficient and there has to be a better way. It felt like that the inefficiency of the writing part far outweighed the increased memory. I am not sure of that now. However, as I am exploring zettlekasten, I have it at the back of my mind that this seems like a fairly time consuming process and in the end will it be worth it? I'll have to evaluate that by seeing how prolific (or not) I end up being with original writing, once the process starts getting implemented.__
            - Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use in your own thinking or writing. Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. [*](((eRojO1adJ)))
                - __I find this very curious. And heartening. "Be extremely selective". For some reason, I believed that it is best to summarize the whole text. But this says to summarize the parts that caught my attention and that I want to remember. That would bring down the time pressure on continuing with this system. However, now I think I'll need to rethink my workflow.__
                - __I was thinking of doing highlights+annotations as quick capture, followed by summarization. But if summarization is for only things that I want to remember, I could do it in parallel with highlights+annotations. Hmmmm.__
                    - #Chat [[William Njau]] [[in-response-to]] "__I was thinking of doing highlights+annotations as quick capture, followed by summarization. But if summarization is for only things that I want to remember, I could do it in parallel with highlights+annotations. Hmmmm.__"
                        - He does mention that "It is okay to skip taking fleeting notes if the idea in your head is already highly processed or you have the time to process it as it arises"
                        - I think that #time is a crucial factor that separates whether one is making a fleeting note or a literature note, what do you think?
            - The idea is not to collect, but to develop ideas, arguments and discussions. Does the new information contradict, correct, support or add to what you already have (in the slip-box or on your mind)? Can you combine ideas to generate something new? What questions are triggered by them? [*](((y5dDNqTm7)))
                - __Idea sex - most important part of the workflow. And sorely missing in my current workflow as of now. This is what I need to focus on as I evolve my workflow. For now looks like 3 parts to the workflow__
                    1. __Highlight+Annotate aka Fleeting notes aka Quick capture__
                    2. __Summarize aka Literature notes__
                    3. __Idea sex aka Permanent notes__
            - Write exactly one note for each idea and write as if you were writing for someone else: Use full sentences, disclose your sources, make references and try to be as precise, clear and brief as possible. [*](((DC7zUzXbl)))
                - __No thoughts. This just seems really relevant and important__
            - After a while, you will have developed ideas far enough to decide on a topic to write about. Your topic is now based on what you have, not based on an unfounded idea about what the literature you are about to read might provide. [*](((WUwVRqAv7)))
                - This on is difficult for me to visualize. I guess I have to wait and see it in action. This piece is basically saying that just read what interests you. Write questions that come to mind. Read more to answer those questions. Come up with new ideas. And keep making notes all the while. And eventually there will be cluster of notes that will form. And that cluster of notes will tell you what you can write about.
            - These are the steps, presented as if you will write only one paper/ article at a time. In reality, you never work on just one idea, but many ideas in different stages at the same time. And that is where the system plays out its real strengths. We cannot help but think about more than one question at a time and the chances are that you will think and write in the future as well. It might not be for academia or a publication, but certainly for your own intellectual growth. Gather what you encounter along your way and don’t let any good idea go to waste. You might read a certain book in hope it could be useful for one of the papers you write. Maybe you are wrong, but it still might contain some interesting thoughts worth keeping and useful for something else you haven’t thought about yet. [*](((20T97LXDY)))
                - __This is the whole point of a digital garden, I guess. Maybe I should read more on digital gardens and not ignore it.__
                    - I was ignoring it too but I can see the value in it now
            - We constantly encounter interesting ideas along the way and only a fraction of them are useful for the particular paper we started reading it for. Why let them go to waste? Make a note and add it to your slip-box. It improves it. Every idea adds to what can become a critical mass that turns a mere collection of ideas into an idea-generator. [*](((-1TPFSwyN)))
                - __This encourages the idea that you read what interests you with no end in mind. If I keep making notes, then at some point in time, in the future, those notes will become useful and become part of an end that shows up as notes cluster up together.__
        - Summary
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
        - Highlights + Annotations
            - According to this story, the Russians faced the same problem. So they used pencils (De Bono, 1998, 141). The slip-box follows the Russian model: Focus on the essentials, don’t complicate things unnecessarily. [*](((sZZifNT1C)))
            - Unfortunately, most students collect and embrace over time a variety of learning and note-taking techniques, each promising to make something easier, but combined have the opposite effect. [*](((m46GGR6-d)))
                - __Unfortunately this so true. And in current times the other danger is to not manage your inflow of information of how others are doing it or what new tool promises to solver all the problems__
            - Few of these techniques are particularly complicated in themselves, but they are usually used without any regard to the actual workflow, which then quickly becomes a mess.[*](((sAV0f1H_P)))
                - __Focus on the workflow. Most important thing.__
            - The slip-box provides an external scaffold to think in and helps with those tasks our brains are not very good at, most of all objective storage of information. [*](((vbI8TekIe)))
                - __The primary reason of taking notes is to think. I need to remind myself of that because I approach it all from the perspective of writing, rather than thinking and coming up with new ideas after idea sex.__
            - We need four tools: 
1) Something to write with and something to write on (pen and paper will do)
2) A reference management system (the best programs are free) 
3) The slip-box (the best program is free)
4) An editor (whatever works best for you: very good ones are free) [*](((t2VqNF_Q0)))
        - Summary
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - Highlights + Annotations
            - Tools are only as good as your ability to work with them.[*](((Y69FIe3Hg)))
            - And it is indeed crucially important not only to know how it works or how to work with it, but also why it works.[*](((yIlbxuFst)))
        - Summary
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - In this mindset, the writing of a paper is just another skill to be learned. It is compartmentalised from the other tasks–it is seen as one task among others. [...] Writing papers is seen as a task in itself with a beginning and an end. [*](((rfxlhKub4)))
                - First, the task to write is given, then there is the challenge to find a topic or a specific angle on a problem, the research to do, starting with the collection of the relevant literature, followed by reading the material, processing it and coming to a conclusion. Writing is what follows: In the beginning stands the question to be answered, followed by an overview of the literature, the discussion of it and the conclusion. [...] "If you become successful in your research, it was not because you learned to approach writing in this way, but despite it." [*](((tRZ3544fl)))
                - Studying, done properly, is research, because it is about gaining insight that cannot be anticipated and will be shared within the scientific community under public scrutiny.[*](((5Bxb_J2dj)))
                - If writing is the medium of research and studying nothing else than research, then there is no reason not to work as if nothing else counts than writing. [*](((U0_AKhDHt)))
                - Working as if nothing else counts than writing does not mean spending more time writing at the expense of everything else. [...] But it does not mean to read less, for this is the main source of the writing material. It doesn’t mean to attend fewer lectures or seminars, because they provide you with the ideas to write about and questions worth answering. [...] Focusing on writing also doesn’t mean to stop giving presentations or finding other ways of making your thoughts public. Where else could you get feedback for your ideas? [*](((pbn4HW864)))
                - Focusing on writing as if nothing else counts does not necessarily mean you should do everything else less well, but it certainly makes you do everything else differently. Having a clear, tangible purpose when you attend a lecture, discussion or seminar will make you more engaged and sharpen your focus. [...] You quickly learn to distinguish good-sounding arguments from actual good ones, as you will have to think them through whenever you try to write them down and connect them with your previous knowledge. It will change the way you read as well: You will become more focused on the most relevant aspects, knowing that you cannot write down everything. You will read in a more engaged way, because you cannot rephrase anything in your own words if you don’t understand what it is about. By doing this, you will elaborate on the meaning, which will make it much more likely that you will remember it. You also have to think beyond the things you read, because you need to turn it into something new. And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. Deliberate practice is the only serious way of becoming better at what we are doing (cf. Anders Ericsson, 2008). [*](((9LdD6VzxA)))
            - Summary
                - Writing is considered a separate activity from learning [*](((MIUTQ8LXi)))
                - For the writing process, you get a writing task -->decide a topic -->collect literature -->read literature -->summarize the literature. And writing comes after that. [*](((Cm2d90_1M)))
                - "If you become successful in your research, it was not because you learned to approach writing in this way, but despite it." [*](((Cm2d90_1M)))
                - Proper studying is same as research because it will help you gain insight which will be publicly shared by your writing [*](((n0nHlyinX)))
                - Writing should be how we study and do research and so nothing else matters, but writing.[*](((jV0rLJPcG)))
                - Working as if writing is the only thing that matters does not mean you do less of other things. You still read as much to have good writing material. You still attend lectures to get ideas to write about. You still make presentations to get your ideas be public and get feedback on them. [*](((ZpK2t-9t9)))
                - Working as if writing is the only thing matters does mean that you do these things differently. Because you have to summarize when you write, your reading will focus on relevant parts only and be more deliberate because you can't write something you don't understand. This will make it more likely that you will remember what you are reading. You will be more focused when attending lectures. Your writing will be stronger as you are forced to think about the ideas and arguments being made and you can throw out the bad ones. So, writing forces you to be deliberate and focused in your activities to acquire knowledge. [*](((sBk2K2FXM)))
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - We tend to think that big transformations have to start with an equally big idea. But more often than not, it is the simplicity of an idea that makes it so powerful (and often overlooked in the beginning). [*](((Zo2Uaa6y3)))
                - It wasn’t just that nobody foresaw the impact of something as simple as this box. Most ship owners had in fact considered the idea of putting different kinds of products into the same sized boxes as fairly abstruse. [*](((cfebc0ULz)))
                    - __Simplicity is powerful precisely because others don't understand it and can't fit it in their world view. That's what revolutionary ideas are. For most people, they are revolutionary only post-facto. But for visionaries, they just make sense without seeing it in action.__
                - And by the way: McLean wasn’t the only one who had the idea to use containers on ships. Many others tried it, too, and almost all gave up on the idea soon after–not because they were too stubborn to accept a great idea, but because they lost too much money on it (Levinson, 2006, 45f). The idea was simple, but it wasn’t easy to put it efficiently into practice. [*](((9-l2gA_P8)))
                    - __This just highlights the fact that there are no original ideas, really. "All originality is undiscovered plagiarism". But then, McLean certainly did something different with the idea to make it work. Maybe it was just perseverance or deeper pockets. But he made some atomic upgrade to the original idea which helped him be successful.__
                - McLean understood better than others that it is not the perspective of the ship-owners that counts, but the purpose of the whole trade: to bring goods from the producer to the final destination. Only after aligning every single part of the delivery chain, from packaging to delivery, from the design of the ships to the design of the harbours, was the full potential of the container unleashed. [*](((9eRcB8Tey)))
                    - __It is important to look at the wholistic perspective to solve the problem. As Sonke talked earlier - you need tools and you know how to work with the tools. In a holistic workflow. Container was just a tool. But McLean understood how to make it work holistically. And that made the simple and un-original idea powerful.__
                - When the advantages became obvious, second-order effects came into play and went into a self-reinforcing positive feedback loop. The more harbours were able to handle containers, the more container ships were needed to be built, which made shipping cheaper, which increased the range of goods worth shipping, which created more traffic, which made bigger container ships economical, which created more demand for infrastructure and so on. It wasn’t just another way of shipping goods. It was a whole new way of doing business. [*](((ziZQ-Jtg0)))
                    - __If you persevere through the original hurdles. And if the idea has some weight behind it. Then, early success can just snowball from there and bring about sweeping changes. In case of note-taking for thinking, once the initial hiccups of putting my workflow together are over, and I can persevere through them, and not give up out of frustration or sidetrack myself by chasing fancy new tools or getting stuck myself in analysis paralysis by reading more and more like a collector. Instead just follow through to outcomes. Then it has the potential of transforming my output. And in our case we actually has the example of Luhmann to suggest that it is just not a shot in the dark. He is a living example of someone who was so prolific. So, there is every reason for us to persevere.__
                - Many students and academic writers think like the early ship owners when it comes to note-taking. They handle their ideas and findings in the way it makes immediate sense: [...] Working like this will leave you with a lot of different notes in many different places.  [*](((iEoGjCKxY)))
                    - __A graveyard for thoughts__
                - In the old system, the question is: Under which topic do I store this note? In the new system, the question is: In which context will I want to stumble upon it again? Most students sort their material by topic or even by seminars and semester. From the perspective of someone who writes, that makes as much sense as sorting your errands by purchase date and the store they were bought from. Can’t find your trousers? Maybe they are with the bleach you bought the same day at your department store. [*](((qjApgS0oM)))
                    - __This is key difference between what Evernote would encourage you to do vs what Roam would encourage you to do. I think the question to be asked when defining the context (i.e. backlinks & hashtags) of the note is - Thinking of what else will trigger a thought about this idea? Or put another way, what else comes to my mind when I think of the idea in this note (And this certainly pre-supposes that there is ONLY one idea per note)__
                - Instead of having different storage for different ideas, everything goes into the same slip-box and is standardised into the same format. [...] everything is streamlined towards one thing only: insight that can be published. The biggest advantage compared to a top-down storage system organised by topics is that the slip-box becomes more and more valuable the more it grows, instead of getting messy and confusing. [...] The slip-box is designed to present you with ideas you have already forgotten, allowing your brain to focus on thinking instead of remembering. [*](((EVjA9eABJ)))
                - Even though the slip-box, being organised bottom-up, does not face the trade-off problem between too many or too few topics, it too can lose its value when notes are added to it indiscriminately. It can only play out its strengths when we aim for a critical mass, which depends not only on the number of notes, but also their quality and the way they are handled. [*](((j2y4NdvQj)))
                - To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes: [*](((qWUhCUP19)))
                    - 1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two. [*](((BL5wHnXDF)))
                    - 2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box. [*](((SWKiDesb1)))
                    - 3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished. [*](((yBtPTbb0b)))
                        - __Whatever happened to literature notes? But I am glad he has introduced the idea of "project notes". This would be the specific article that I am planning to write. More like a chapter or story inventory that I look to create. So, all in all are we looking at fleeting notes, literature notes, permanent notes and project notes? That would make sense to me. Depending on my goals with a reading material, it will depend if they progress from one stage to next or not? But it does leave the question as to at what stage do I link to different context? I guess at whatever is the latest stage to which I am planning to take the notes of a specific reading material. Hmmmm__
                - Only if the notes of these three categories are kept separated it will be possible to build a critical mass of ideas within the slip-box. One of the major reasons for not getting much writing or publishing done lies in the confusion of these categories. [*](((7_jHUj4nP)))
                - A typical mistake is made by many diligent students who are adhering to the advice to keep a scientific journal. [...]The advantage is obvious: No idea ever gets lost. The disadvantages are serious, though: As he treats every note as if it belongs to the “permanent” category, the notes will never build up a critical mass. The collection of good ideas is diluted to insignificance by all the other notes, which are only relevant for a specific project or actually not that good on second sight. On top of that, the strict chronological order does not offer any help to find, combine or rearrange ideas in a productive sense. [*](((7GWVsCHA5)))
                    - __Not every note is equally important and needs to be treated accordingly. Some need to be just left at fleeting level as a reminder. And some where I just need to capture information need to be left at literature level. Only if I want to use it further for provoking thought, do I need to take it to permanent note level. So, the question I am still left with is do I add backlinks at the literature level, if I plan to take something to permanent level?__
                - The second typical mistake is to collect notes only related to specific projects. On first sight, it makes much more sense. You decide on what you are going to write about and then collect everything that helps you to do that. The disadvantage is that you have to start all over after each project and cut off all other promising lines of thought. That means that everything you found, thought or encountered during the time of a project will be lost. If you try to mitigate the effect by opening a new folder for every potential new project whenever you stumble upon something that might be interesting for that, you will soon end up with an overwhelming amount of unfinished projects. If that in itself does not become a drag on your motivation, the task of keeping track of them will. But most importantly, without a permanent reservoir of ideas, you will not be able to develop any major ideas over a longer period of time because you are restricting yourself either to the length of a single project or the capacity of your memory. Exceptional ideas need much more than that. [*](((HlsQj7ZDO)))
                    - __Ouch. This one hits home really hard. I have been thinking about ideas that I want to write on and then have been collecting related material which is appropriately tagged to be found when needed for that topic. I don't even know how will I end up deciding to write about when I don't start with the idea in the first place and structure my research behind that. I can understand how to go about living my life and reading just what I find interesting, making notes and then forgetting about it. And trust that it will show up at the right time. But how will ideas to write about surface? Perhaps something to ask in the book club__
                - The third typical mistake is, of course, to treat all notes as fleeting ones. You can easily spot this approach by the mess that comes with it, or rather by the cycle of slowly growing piles of material followed by the impulse for major clean-ups. Just collecting unprocessed fleeting notes inevitably leads to chaos. Even small amounts of unclear and unrelated notes lingering around your desk will soon induce the wish of starting from scratch. [*](((V8bEn02_W)))
                    - __Well, this is how life is currently. Just a collection of highlights and annotations, if that. The point of this exercise to evolve my note taking to next step of summarizing and then on to idea sex.__
                - What all these category-confusing approaches have in common is that the benefit of note-taking decreases with the number of notes you keep. More notes will make it more difficult to retrieve the right ones and bring related ones together in a playful way. But it should be just the opposite: The more you learn and collect, the more beneficial your notes should become, the more ideas can mingle and give birth to new ones–and the easier it should be to write an intelligent text with less effort. [*](((wIYnbucZC)))
                - It is important to reflect on the purpose of these different types of notes. Fleeting notes are there for capturing ideas quickly while you are busy doing something else. When you are in a conversation, listening to a lecture, hear something noteworthy or an idea pops into your mind while you are running errands, a quick note is the best you can do without interrupting what you are in the middle of doing. That might even apply to reading, if you want to focus on a text without interrupting your reading flow. Then you might want to just underline sentences or write short comments in the margins. It is important to understand, though, that underlining sentences or writing comments in the margins are also just fleeting notes and do nothing to elaborate on a text. They will very soon become completely useless–unless you do something with them. If you already know that you will not go back to them, don’t take these kind of notes in the first place. Take proper notes instead. Fleeting notes are only useful if you review them within a day or so and turn them into proper notes you can use later. Fleeting literature notes can make sense if you need an extra step to understand or grasp an idea, but they will not help you in the later stages of the writing process, as no underlined sentence will ever present itself when you need it in the development of an argument. These kinds of notes are just reminders of a thought, which you haven’t had the time to elaborate on yet. Permanent notes, on the other hand, are written in a way that can still be understood even when you have forgotten the context they are taken from. [*](((wmFEVrD5o)))
                - Most ideas will not stand the test of time, while others might become the seed for a major project. Unfortunately, they are not easy to distinguish right away. That is why the threshold to write an idea down has to be as low as possible, but it is equally crucial to elaborate on them within a day or two. A good indication that a note has been left unprocessed too long is when you no longer understand what you meant or it appears banal. In the first case, you forgot what it was supposed to remind you of. In the second case, you forgot the context that gave it its meaning. [*](((BRp1QJSON)))
                - The only permanently stored notes are the literature notes in the reference system and the main notes in the slip-box. The former can be very brief as the context is clearly the text they refer to. The latter need be written with more care and details as they need to be self-explanatory. Luhmann never underlined sentences in the text he read or wrote comments in the margins. All he did was take brief notes about the ideas that caught his attention in a text on a separate piece of paper: “I make a note with the bibliographic details. On the backside I would write ‘on page x is this, on page y is that,’ and then it goes into the bibliographic slip-box where I collect everything I read.” (Hagen, 1997)[ 13] But before he stored them away, he would read what he noted down during the day, think about its relevance for his own lines of thought and write about it, filling his main slip-box with permanent notes. Nothing in this box would ever get thrown away. Some notes might disappear into the background and never catch his attention again, while others might become connection points to various lines of reasoning and reappear on a regular basis in various contexts. [*](((sA3wOx9on)))
                - As it is not possible to foresee the development of the slip-box, the fate of the notes is nothing to worry about. In contrast to the fleeting notes, every permanent note for the slip-box is elaborated enough to have the potential to become part of or inspire a final written piece, but that can not be decided on up front as their relevance depends on future thinking and developments. The notes are no longer reminders of thoughts or ideas, but contain the actual thought or idea in written form. This is a crucial difference. [*](((UZ4XCHfSA)))
                - Only because every note is in the same format at the same place can they later be combined and assembled into something new and no thought is ever wasted on the question of where to put or label it. [*](((XVevLqYUv)))
                - 
            - Summary
                - Simplicity of an idea is very powerful and most of the times simple ideas are ignored at first[*](((iWhF0PfqA)))
                - In case of transport containers, most ship owners found the idea of putting cargo in same sized boxes difficult to understand. Simplicity is powerful precisely because others don't understand it and can't fit it in their world view. That's what revolutionary ideas are. For most people, they are revolutionary only post-facto. But for visionaries, they just make sense without seeing it in action [*](((zHP6CA5Zn)))
                - Others, besides McLean, had tried the idea of using containers, but failed. The idea was simple but not easy to implement. This just highlights the fact that there are no original ideas, really. "All originality is undiscovered plagiarism". But then, McLean certainly did something different with the idea to make it work. Maybe it was just perseverance or deeper pockets. But he made some atomic upgrade to the original idea which helped him be successful.[*](((UfoJZ0-0q)))
                - McLean also understood what really mattered. Not the opinion of a few but the actual outcome of the trading activity which needed to be looked at holistically - as an ecosystem. It is important to look at the wholistic perspective to solve the problem. As Sonke talked earlier - you need tools and you know how to work with the tools in a holistic workflow. Container was just a tool. But McLean understood how to make it work holistically. And that made the simple and un-original idea powerful. [*](((c7pYF3kb8)))
                - As the advantages of using containers became clear everything started falling into place. The whole ecosystem went into a positive feedback loop and changes started happening to make it all better and better. If you persevere through the original hurdles. And if the idea has some weight behind it. Then, early success can just snowball from there and bring about sweeping changes. In case of note-taking for thinking, once the initial hiccups of putting my workflow together are over, and I can persevere through them, and not give up out of frustration or sidetrack myself by chasing fancy new tools or getting myself stuck in analysis paralysis by reading more and more like a collector. Then it has the potential of transforming my output. And in our case we actually has the example of Luhmann to suggest that it is just not a shot in the dark. He is a living example of someone who was so prolific. So, there is every reason for us to persevere.[*](((Vn_RursLd))) 
                - Like the earlier shipowners before McLean, in case of note-taking, if we don't change our way of thinking to look at things holistically and away from our current way of working i.e. highlights and underlines and notes in the margins, then we are just building a graveyard of thoughts. Where ideas go to die a slow death in form of notes. With a lot of potential to start with, but fading away as they get behind in the chronological line and other ideas pile up in front of them. [*](((qYNZCv8PK)))
                - In old system of note taking, people ask - under what category does this  note go? In new system, the question to be asked is - In what context or thinking of what other things do I want to remember this note? This is key difference between old and new - what Evernote would encourage you to do vs what Roam would encourage you to do. The question to be asked when defining the context (i.e. backlinks & hashtags) of the note is - Thinking of what else will trigger a thought about this idea? Or put another way, what else comes to my mind now when I think of the idea in this note (And this certainly pre-supposes that there is ONLY one idea per note) [*](((16Ticu-G0)))
                - Standardization in note taking is important to make it more effective. Everything goes in one place in a standard way. We have one goal from our note-taking i.e. to gain insights - new ideas - that can be published. Slip-box, as opposed to top-down notes, gets more useful as it gets bigger with more ideas. It is designed to surface the ideas in the right context for you, much after you have forgotten the ideas. This helps us focus on thinking instead of trying to remembering.[*](((O6jUzkU_3)))
                - Slip-box can also end up being a graveyard of ideas if the notes are not of good quality and are not processed after being put there [*](((QE1oM1SKF)))
                - And the critical mass and quality of notes comes if there are clearly 4 different kind of notes (He had 3 but I run with 4 types)
                    - Fleeting notes (Highlights & Annotations)
                    - Literature notes (Summary)
                    - Permanent notes (Idea sex)
                    - Project notes - these are specific to a topic or project that I want to write about
                    - I am glad Sonke has introduced the idea of "project notes". This would be the specific article that I am planning to write. More like a chapter or story inventory that I look to create. So, all in all are we looking at fleeting notes, literature notes, permanent notes and project notes? That would make sense to me. Depending on my goals with a reading material, it will depend if they progress from one stage to next or not? But it does leave the question as to at what stage do I link to a different context? I guess at whatever is the latest stage to which I am planning to take the notes of a specific reading material. Hmmmm__ [*](((s2GZlahj0)))
                    - [*](((BdUQl7zDY)))
                - Lack of much writing by people is because of mixing up the categories. For that matter, I never went beyond the fleeting notes myself, which clearly are not very useful for publication. They also aren't much help with memorization. The goal of reading should be to learn and think. Not to memorize or write. Summarization helps with memorization. And then spaced repetition. But writing comes even after with idea sex. [*](((YRgEgrJPX)))
                - Mistakes people make with note taking
                    - Chronological list of notes aka journal
                        - Keeping a journal of all ideas flowing in is very enticing as none of the ideas get lost. But if they are all treated as permanent notes, then they are of no use as each of the ideas gets diluted because there are so many and there is no separation between good ideas to be used and pedestrian ideas to be forgotten. So, permanent notes help us elevate some notes to the point where they can be used in our writing. Chronological order of journal also doesn't help with idea sex.[*](((k5RozpNMe)))
                            - __Not every note is equally important and needs to be treated accordingly. Some need to be just left at fleeting level as a reminder. And some where I just need to capture information need to be left at literature level. Only if I want to use it further for provoking thought, do I need to take it to permanent note level. So, the question I am still left with is do I add backlinks at the literature level, if I plan to take something to permanent level?__ [*](((R6tWX2XsZ)))
                    - Collecting project specific notes only
                        - This seems to make sense as you decide what to write about and then collect all that will help with it. Like I think of writing articles. The problem is that it encourages you to limit your thought process within the confines of the subject or topic. You let go of any other interesting line of thought as you don't want to go down the rabbit hole, otherwise there will be many unfinished projects which are difficult to keep track of. (But in using Roam this might not be a problem as you can drop a link to thought and just leave it at that without pursuing it at the time. And it will show up later because you kept a door open with a backlink). Great ideas need to be let free of the confines of a project.  [*](((uSu5rhNUl)))
                            - __This one hits home really hard. I have been thinking about ideas that I want to write on and then have been collecting related material which is appropriately tagged to be found when needed for that topic. I don't even know how will I end up deciding to write about when I don't start with the idea in the first place and structure my research behind that. I can understand how to go about living my life and reading just what I find interesting, making notes and then forgetting about it. And trust that it will show up at the right time. But how will ideas to write about surface? Perhaps something to ask in the book club__ [*](((mtrVBj2f-)))
                    - Treating all notes as fleeting notes
                        - This ends up just a hotch-potch collection of notes which are not related to each other in any way[*](((DPpWhPFg7)))
                            - __Well, this is how life is currently. Just a collection of highlights and annotations, if that. The point of this exercise to evolve my note taking to next step of summarizing and then on to idea sex.__ [*](((extaLYvJF)))
                - With category based note taking systems, the larger the number of notes, less useful the database is. With slip-box, the larger the number of notes, more chances of them mixing to produce more ideas.[*](((sslDJ_oN-)))
                - Need for different types of notes:
                    - Fleeting notes (aka highlights + annotations) - grab a thought when you are on the go or don't want your reading flow to be interrupted. These should be reviewed within a day or so, otherwise they go waste. They are reminders to give detail to a note later. They don't present themselves at the right time to build upon for new ideas[*](((cyqzhco4k))) Most ideas will never get used in writing. But, we don't know that ahead of time. So, don't think too much if an idea is worth keeping or not - just keep it. A fleeting note has gone stale if you can't remember why you wrote that and have forgotten the context.[*](((O2HBfBIgD)))
                    - Literature notes are in the reference system (for Roam it will really be the page created specifically for that book or article that I am reading as it will have all the bibliographical information in there). For Luhmann, the notes he takes while reading seem to be making up the literature notes and not the summarization. It seems that Sonke has added that aspect to note taking process outside of Luhmann's process. It's possible. For me, literature notes, that are with its reference will be a summarization of highlights and also annotations that I have made based on what thoughts arose as I read the book or article. [*](((bn9WZGriR)))
                    - Permanent notes are written in such a way that they don't need us to remember the original context. Before forgetting about his literature notes, he would read his literature notes and think about how they are relevant to whatever notes he has in the main slip-box. For me, in Roam, it will show up by aggressively backlinking the idea with multiple contexts that show up. And then go into each of those contexts and see how this new idea relates to existing other ideas showing up in that context. This is something I really don't have an idea about, how to do. As I have never done it. Maybe I should try. At least with a specific topic (even thought as per Sonke that is supposed to be a mistake). None of the permanent notes are ever thrown away although some of them may fade into the background. With our digital world, there is no need to even throw away the fleeting notes.[*](((bn9WZGriR))) Permanent notes are fully written pieces and not needing outside context to be meaningful. They are in a state that they could be easily used in a written piece and can stand on their own legs. They have evolved from being reminders of ideas to be fully fledged ideas to be consumed
                        - __I can't wait to get to a point where I can get idea sex going. It could get to something really beautiful because I am very prolific in my written expression any way. It could just propel everything forward__
                    - 
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
            - Highlights + Annotations + Quotes
                - Be it twelve steps, according to the Academic Skills & Learning Centre of the Australian National University, or eight, if you go with the recommendations of the Writing Center of the University of Wisconsin, the rough order is always the same: Make a decision on what to write about, plan your research, do your research, write. Interestingly enough, these road maps usually come with the concession that this is only an idealised plan and that in reality, it rarely works like that. This is certainly true. Writing can’t be that linear. The obvious question is: If that is true, why not root the course of action in reality instead? [*](((s2br3-pds)))
                - In order to develop a good question to write about or find the best angle for an assignment, one must already have put some thought into a topic. To be able to decide on a topic, one must already have read quite a bit and certainly not just about one topic. And the decision to read something and not something else is obviously rooted in prior understanding, and that didn’t come out of thin air, either. Every intellectual endeavour starts from an already existing preconception, which then can be transformed during further inquires and can serve as a starting point for following endeavours. Basically, that is what Hans-Georg Gadamer called the hermeneutic circle (Gadamer 2004). And even though the hermeneutic circle is regularly taught in university, writing at the same time continues to be taught as if we could start from scratch and move forward in a straight line–as if it were possible to pull a good question out of thin air and wait with the reading until the literature research is done. The seemingly pragmatic and down-to-earth-sounding advice–to decide what to write about before you start writing–is therefore either misleading or banal. It is banal if it means only that you should think before you put words on paper. It is misleading if it means that you could make a sound plan on what to write before you have immersed yourself in the topics at hand, which involves writing. It accompanies everything: We have to read with a pen in hand, develop ideas on paper and build up an ever-growing pool of externalised thoughts. We will not be guided by a blindly made-up plan picked from our unreliable brains, but by our interest, curiosity and intuition, which is formed and informed by the actual work of reading, thinking, discussing, writing and developing ideas–and is something that continuously grows and reflects our knowledge and understanding externally. [*](((kvk3dCa8w)))
                - By focusing on what is interesting and keeping written track of your own intellectual development, topics, questions and arguments will emerge from the material without force. Not only does it mean that finding a topic or a research question will become easier, as we don’t have to squeeze it out of the few ideas that are on top of our head anymore, every question that emerges out of our slip-box will naturally and handily come with material to work with. If we look into our slip-box to see where clusters have built up, we not only see possible topics, but topics we have already worked on–even if we were not able to see it up front. The idea that nobody ever starts from scratch suddenly becomes very concrete. If we take it seriously and work accordingly, we literally never have to start from scratch again. [*](((2U8Id9Bu8)))
                - Of course, those who believe that they do start from scratch don’t really start from scratch, either, as they too can only draw on what they have learned or encountered before. But as they haven’t acted on this fact, they can’t track ideas back to their origins and have neither supporting material at hand nor their sources in order. As writing has not accompanied their previous work, they have to either start with something completely new (which is risky) or retrace their ideas (which is boring). [*](((jBf2xPhoD)))
                - As proper note-taking is rarely taught or discussed, it is no wonder that almost every guide on writing recommends to start with brainstorming. If you haven’t written along the way, the brain is indeed the only place to turn to. On its own, it is not such a great choice: it is neither objective nor reliable–two quite important aspects in academic or nonfiction writing. The promotion of brainstorming as a starting point is all the more surprising as it is not the origin of most ideas: The things you are supposed to find in your head by brainstorming usually don’t have their origins in there. Rather, they come from the outside: through reading, having discussions and listening to others, through all the things that could have been accompanied and often even would have been improved by writing. The advice to think about what to write about before you write comes both too early and too late. Too late, as you already have passed up the chance to build up written resources when you face the white sheet of paper or the blank screen, but also too early, if you try to postpone every serious content-related work until you have made a decision on the topic. [*](((ww64gf_vE)))
                - If something comes too early and too late at the same time, it is not possible to fix it by rearranging the order as the fictional linearity is the problem in itself. Taking smart notes is the precondition to break with the linear order. There is one reliable sign if you managed to structure your workflow according to the fact that writing is not a linear process, but a circular one: the problem of finding a topic is replaced by the problem of having too many topics to write about. Having trouble finding the right topic is a symptom of the wrong attempt to rely heavily on the limitations of the brain, not the inevitable problematic starting point, as most study guides insinuate. If you on the other hand develop your thinking in writing, open questions will become clearly visible and give you an abundance of possible topics to elaborate further in writing. [*](((6ZfzhxuL5)))
                - After many years of working with students, I am convinced that the attempt of these study guides to squeeze a nonlinear process like writing into a linear order is the main reason for the very problems and frustrations they promise to solve. How can you not have trouble finding a topic if you believe you have to decide on one before you have done your research, have read and learned about something? How can you not feel threatened by an empty page if you have literally nothing at hand to fill it with? Who can blame you for procrastinating if you find yourself stuck with a topic you decided on blindly and now have to stick with it as the deadline is approaching? And how can anyone be surprised that students feel overwhelmed with writing assignments when they are not taught how to turn months and years of reading, discussing and research into material they can really use? [*](((SQRXUZCcv)))
                - These study guides, which neglect everything before a writing assignment is given, are a little bit like financial advisors who discuss how 65-year-olds can save for retirement. At this point you would be better off curbing your enthusiasm (which is exactly what one of the most often sold study guides in Germany recommends: first, lower your expectations on quality and insight).[ 16] [*](((c8YTVOPw1)))
                - But those who have already developed their thinking through writing can keep the focus on what is interesting for them at the moment and accumulate substantial material just by doing what they most feel like doing. The material will cluster around the questions they returned to most often, so they don’t risk too far of a departure from their interest. If your first chosen topic turns out to be not as interesting, you will just move on and your notes will cluster around something else. Maybe you will even note down the reasons why the first question is not interesting and turn that into an insight valuable enough to make public. When it finally comes to the decision on what to write about, you will already have made the decision–because you made it on every single step along the way, again and again every day, improving it gradually. Instead of spending your time worrying about finding the right topic, you will spend your time actually working on your already existing interests and doing what is necessary to make informed decisions–reading, thinking and writing. By doing the work, you can trust that interesting questions will emerge. You might not know where you will end up (and you don’t need to), but you can’t force insight into a preconceived direction anyway. You minimise both the risk of losing interest in a topic you have once chosen ill-informed and the risk of having to start all over again. [*](((F-jhYj-Pz)))
                - Even though academic writing is not a linear process, that does not mean you should follow an anything-goes approach. On the contrary, a clear, reliable structure is paramount.
 [*](((Qoz63n9I8)))
            - Summary
                - Typically recommended workflow for writing is: Make a choice of topic --> Plan research --> Do research --> Write. In reality though, writing is not so linear. [*](((cG9_RAamc)))
                    - __But truly, it can be. We do it today. I can choose a topic. Run some searches. Collect sources. Read sources. Summarize. Add my insights. Rearrange. And publish. But, it surely is possible that this form of writing won't be as insightful or deep. It would be more like curation with a few thoughts peppered in here and there. Not true value add. That would be writing for the purpose of writing. Not for the purpose of understanding and adding value to the conversation. That's so shallow. It's like being a reporter instead of a thought leader.__
                - To dive into a specific question on a topic, you should know something about the topic. To choose a topic, you should have read about at least a few different topics which would be the set to choose from. And what topics you would read about also depends on knowledge of topics before that. So, start of any intellectual inquiry is based on a starting set. And that inquiry can then become the source of further inquiry in the future. Despite knowledge of hermeneutic circle, writing is expected to be a linear process instead of an outcome of this building of knowledge on top of each other, or as a growing network of thought. Instead writing should be thought of as a way to build new ideas on what we are interested in and curious about. [*](((mfcyNsqhe)))
                    - #question: What is hermeneutic circly by Hans-Georg Gadamer?
                - If you write about what you are interested in, topic of research will be easy to find in what you have written. Additionally it will come with supporting material. If this is how we work, we never have to start from scratch or from a blank sheet of paper. [*](((1rmH60wuv)))
                - Even people who think that they start from scratch, really don't do so. Their start is based on what they have encountered. It is just that they are relying on their brain to get started instead of written material on paper. But they have a disadvantage that they have to now go and find the supporting material as they did not keep track of it. And will also have to retrace the chain of ideas. [*](((gqllPc7CH)))
                - If you don't have written record of all that you were interested in, the only way to start a writing process, as suggested, is to brainstorm. There is no other option, but to turn to your brain to get started. Even though you think the ideas are coming from your brain, but in fact, they got planted in your brain by external factors like reading, discussions etc. [*](((ptlHNbTuB)))
                - If you treat writing as a circular process, instead of linear, you will never struggle with finding a topic to write. And if you are struggling with finding topics, you know you are doing it wrong. [*](((f0kntR9lp)))
                - All the various challenges that students face like unable to find topics, fear of empty page i.e. writer's block, procrastination and overwhelm - are result of advice to fit a circular process into a linear framework. [*](((_woIhsD_6)))
                - Thinking through writing solves all of these problems. Your material will center around things that you find interesting because you spend more time seeking them out and writing about them. If something is uninteresting, you just move on. And when you have to decide what to write about, you have material available for things that you are interested in. This makes reading, learning and writing more interesting. [*](((67J19ylsE)))
                - A clear structure to your writing process is very important for success, even though it is not a linear process.
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
            - Decided to not copy every thing as there doesn't seem to be a point. I'll be copying every paragraph like last chapter. For now, I am just referencing nodes that I have annotations on with the assumption that rest of all needs to be referenced anyway.
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - Following a circular approach, on the other hand, allows you to implement many feedback loops, which give you the chance to improve your work while you are working on it. It is not just about increasing the number of opportunities to learn, but also to be able to correct the mistakes we inevitably make. As the feedback loops are usually smaller than one big chunk of feedback at the end, they are also much less scary and easier to embrace. [*](((LoKPUYPOR)))
                    - __This is also the scientific method that Anne-Laure talks about using in her course. That is also using a metacognitive loop between Knowledge, Regulation and Experience. And I would say that the "experience" part of the loop is the feedback that you get. Also, her method of sharing bite sized content as parts of different stages of creation process is opening yourself up to the growth mindset by putting yourself out there for feedback.__
                - The slip-box is not a collection of notes. Working with it is less about retrieving specific notes and more about being pointed to relevant facts and generating insight by letting ideas mingle. Its usability grows with its size, not just linearly but exponentially. When we turn to the slip-box, its inner connectedness will not just provide us with isolated facts, but with lines of developed thoughts. Moreover, because of its inner complexity, a search throught the slip-box will confront us with related notes we did not look for. This is a very significant difference that becomes more and more relevant over time. The more content it contains, the more connections it can provide, and the easier it becomes to add new entries in a smart way and receive useful suggestions. [*](((U0D-8ZKaX)))
                    - __I do not clearly understand this aspect of stacks of notes or "lines of developed thoughts" or bunching of notes together. I need to figure out how does this really happen in the slip box. And I guess, I will be able to do that more as my own slipbox fills up with notes and is not just a stack of unrelated notes__
            - Summary
                - When you are working in flow state, the work itself energizes you instead of draining your energy. [*](((RK0T2uHBh)))
                - A good workflow is a positively reinforcing cycle. You like what you do, you want to do more of it. Doing more of it, makes you better at it. As you get better at it, you enjoy it more. And the loop goes on. [*](((NcwnhsymJ)))
                - Rewarding yourself for completion is a weak and short term fix. For it to be sustainable, work itself needs to be rewarding and the positive feedback loop of enjoyment, motivation, and getting better needs to be put in place [*](((RQQ2w8HSU)))
                - Fitness coach Michelle Segar found success with clients by helping them identify physical activity which they enjoyed doing so that will power wasn't a factor. [*](((ZLooaikXs)))
                - Feedback loop is also important in the process of learning. When we see ourselves getting better, we are motivated to learn more. So, the act of seeking feedback is crucial for getting better. This is also supported by Carol Dweck's work on "growth mindset" leading to long term success for people. You want to grow? seek feedback. Because the feedback might come in negative and chip at positive self-image, there can be resistance to seeking feedback. Gifted and talented tend to fall in this trap more often. Growth mindset means that you are happy when you get better as opposed to when you receive praise. [*](((AR7OaXAvj)))
                - Besides being open to receive feedback, it is also necessary to have feedback loop that provides feedback quickly and often. [*](((fAEc5q4n4)))
                - Feedback loops allow you to fix the mistakes while the work is ongoing. And not when it is all done. And because feedback loops are smaller, the changes needed to be made because of feedback are also smaller and less daunting. This is also the scientific method that Anne-Laure talks about using in her course. That is also using a metacognitive loop between Knowledge, Regulation and Experience. And I would say that the "experience" part of the loop is the feedback that you get. Also, her method of sharing bite sized content as parts of different stages of creation process is opening yourself up to the growth mindset by putting yourself out there for feedback [*](((LoKPUYPOR)))
                - Writing the ideas in our own words while reading helps us better understand the ideas and also better explain them to others. If we do a poor job of summarizing, we will run into trouble as we create permanent notes and link them together. [*](((XNIhRfrZU)))
                - Summarizing in our own words, if done well, creates a positive feedback loop. More you summarize, the better you get at it and then more you summarize and do it faster. It also creates a positive feedback loop for us to separate out important parts of the reading. [*](((oO7Kd61Qe)))
                - Positive feedback loop is there for creation of permanent notes also. Problems will show up when we try to link them, if the notes are not created well. These feedback loops within the slip-box do not replace feedback from peers and teachers, it is one always available. Which continuously gets better as we learn more and use it more. [*](((Xy_6Gvicd)))
                - Slip-box is not a "graveyard of notes", but a garden where ideas have sex giving birth to new insights. It exponentially becomes useful as it grows in size. When you lean into it for ideas, it will give you fully developed thoughts that are supported by related ideas, which you did not even remember. [*](((U0D-8ZKaX)))
                    - question: __I do not clearly understand this aspect of stacks of notes or "lines of developed thoughts" or bunching of notes together. I need to figure out how does this really happen in the slip box. And I guess, I will be able to do that more as my own slipbox fills up with notes and is not just a stack of unrelated notes__
                - Our brain also stores information by creating these connections. When new information comes in, it gets saved by making a meaningful connections. More connections there are easier it is to store new information. These connections makes learning, remembering and later on retrieving the information easier. Networked thought. [*](((E6qEFWAIg)))
                - Since we write the notes ourselves, we also learn as slip-box grows. The interaction between our brain and the slip-box is the key to productivity. [*](((MHzKOP6xZ)))
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - The moment we stop making plans is the moment we start to learn. It is a matter of practice to become good at generating insight and write good texts by choosing and moving flexibly between the most important and promising tasks, judged by nothing else than the circumstances of the given situation. It is similar to the moment where we had the training wheels of our bikes taken off and started to learn cycling properly. We might have felt a bit insecure in the first moment, but at the same time, it became obvious that we would never have learned to bicycle if we left the training wheels on. The only thing we would have learned is to ride a bike with training wheels on. [*](((5dE8cfQGo)))
                    - #quote "We might have felt a bit insecure in the first moment, but at the same time, it became obvious that we would never have learned to bicycle if we left the training wheels on. The only thing we would have learned is to ride a bike with training wheels on."
                    - __And in my experience, the moment we stop making plans is the moment we start enjoying. This is so freeing. I hope the writing comes to be so. Just like my travels. No plans. Just go. Enjoy. No constraints. Couldn't life be so? Why not? Who's stopping me? Responsibilities? Perhaps. Needing to manage other's expectations. Maybe. But there might be a middle ground. I am sure, life can be so - you just have to find, how to make that happen.__
                - "The moment we stop making plans is the moment we start to learn."  [*](((5dE8cfQGo)))
                    - __I think this is true to enjoying life too. If we are planning, we are not enjoying. Like when I travel - with little planning__
                - Similarly, no one would ever learn the art of productive academic writing just by following plans or linear, multistep prescripts–one would learn only to follow plans or prescripts. The widespread praise for planning rests on the misconception that a process like writing an academic text, which is highly dependent on cognition and thinking, can rely on conscious decision-making alone. But academic writing is an art, as well, which means it is something we can become better at with experience and deliberate practice. [*](((n7EHntVBl)))
                    - __This highlights that different kinds of activities need different levels of planning. From zero to high levels of planning. And I guess the point for me is that I should look to involve myself in activities that require zero planning. To have that as my bread and butter - with a financial flywheel. That is what will fulfill me.__
                - The smartest way to deal with this kind of limitation is to cheat. Instead of forcing ourselves to do something we don’t feel like doing, we need to find a way to make us feel like doing what moves our project further along. Doing the work that need to be done without having to apply too much willpower requires a technique, a ruse. [*](((Gm7E9iVxd)))
                    - __This is getting interesting as this is falling in the realm of the question about - Should you find work that you love to do OR find love for the work that you do. The podcast with Seth Godin was last I remember where it was last talked about. And he talked about needing to love what we do - that is a better way to live. It's same as what Farzi told me - It's not your job's job to define you indicating that you need to find a way to love your job. I personally can't stand behind this as I found it really difficult to push myself through such a torture. I am curious what rest of the text here says__
                - 
            - Summary
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - You can type a literature note directly into Zotero, where it will be stored with the bibliographic details. You might want to write them by hand, though.  [*](((66Orx12hV)))
                    - would it not make sense to write on remarkable for my summary. Maybe I should try that with the next book I read. But man, it will take such a long time.
            - Summary
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - "Experienced academic readers usually read a text with questions in mind and try to relate it to other possible approaches, while inexperienced readers tend to adopt the question of a text and the frames of the argument and take it as a given. What good readers can do is spot the limitations of a particular approach and see what is not mentioned in the text." [*](((x8xsQz6Ns)))
                    - __This is uncannily true in my case. I have observed and known this about myself. But, yet, I have not done anything about it. Now the question is, now that it is out in the open and duly acknowledged - how do I change my way of reading? First thing to do would be to slow down. Rest, I'll need to figure out.__
                - “No, no!” Feynman protested. “They aren’t a record of my thinking process. They are my thinking process. I actually did the work on the paper.” [*](((CenVMab1s)))
                    - __This is so anti how I have viewed learning and thinking i.e. cognition. I still remember once having a conversation with two guys, almost 30 years back, who asked me - "you are not taking notes in class?" And I pointed to my head and boastingly said - "it's all in here". And I remember them looking at me admiringly and me smiling back at them - smugly. And all of this despite no evidence that I was any more successful than them in schoolwork. Or for that matter, being relatively successful at all beyond being mediocre. Following this method of taking notes would likely help me learn better and actually get succesful?__
                - Amongst researchers, it's now generally agreed that we need a structure - some system or process - external to us, to help us do a better job. And in our case this external system is the conscious act of connecting the ideas sitting in the slip-box.[*](((2sYG94d4g)))
                - When adding an idea to the slip-box, ask yourself - why do I find this important? And write out the reasons on the note. [*](((KtJWTVMtt)))
                - Writing literature notes is done with an eye towards the context of the book and take the author's idea through a scrutiny and make the author convince you by constantly asking questions. [*](((_uAV-EOTz)))
                    - Is this really true?
                    - Can this be wrong?
                    - What is author's context of making this argument?
                    - Is their argument in-line with what I have read before or is contrasting to it?
                - When writing permanent notes, you ask questions in your own context - your own worldview. Why am I making a note about this idea? [*](((eNwLWd0n0)))
                    - __I seem to be doing this while I am writing fleeting notes or literature notes. I can't help but write why I found a note interesting. I keep writing that all the time. __
                - As you are writing permanent notes into the slip-box, more questions about the idea would be coming up. Go ahead and look for the answer to these questions in the slip box. [*](((0fqdRqSY7)))
                    - __This is where bi-directional links in Roam start helping. That link will really just help me define if this idea showed up in a context that the question is bringing up__
                - As you look for other contexts where you are trying to find an answer to the questions coming up for you, you might realize that this idea is useful in different contexts or topics. There is no need to abandon your current question and follow the new thread you found, but we should certainly record the link or the association or the connection with the new context. And move on trying to find answer to my original question. [*](((1yQzlfyLI)))
                    - __Not sure how this "skimming" will be done in Roam. __
                - First step of summarizing with literature notes will help us remember ideas better. Next step is to inject those ideas within our own network of thoughts. And find a rightful place for it. [First half of block*](((Ik_kcHogX)))
                    - __It may go inside the network linked to a specific thought, but we'll find soon enough that it is also connected to other thoughts. Isn't that what knowledge map, that Anne-Laure helped us learn, all about? Instead of creating those connections in Scapple I would need to figure out how that gets done within roam because the ideas are already sitting there. I don't want to create the overhead of these tools.__
                - In Luhman's world literature notes will be lost as they get archived. To make sure that no ideas are lost, they need to be transferred to a permanent note and put in the slip-box. [Second Half of block*](((Ik_kcHogX)))
                    - __But is this really a problem in our digital world? They stay on. We don't have to lose our literature notes. If I can manage to have the interplay of ideas or idea-sex, right from literature notes, then why not? This will reduce the overhead. But what will I give up?__
                - Putting ideas into slip-box allows us to forget them which help us get better at learning. If we have a sound system, we don't need to fear losing these ideas because we are not remembering them ourselves. [*](((wz1tMENoR)))
                - Example of Shereshevsky shows us that remembering too much comes in the way understanding the concepts. And also create problems in separating important ideas from not so important ideas. [*](((m535H4xNn))) [*](((v4uTJLRFT))) 
                - Forgetting, then, is a filter, a self preserving mechanism to be able to focus on the world around us and not drown in a sea of memories. We forget the irrelevant pieces [*](((l3Z_t0R9K))) [*](((CWYS7gQKl)))
                - In context of memory we have brain's strength of storing memory and strength of retrieving memory [*](((J0FDxuUyD)))
                - Storing information in the brain is not like storing in a computer hard drive. It is storing and making connections. That's why retrieving one strand allows us to start remembering other associated ideas. [*](((2IObrNCCg)))
                - Cramming focuses on strength of storage and is storing ideas by repetition, instead of creating a network of ideas. [*](((fqbzgEa19)))
                - Instead, we should focus on strength of retrieval and that makes us think in terms of associations so that cues are created to retrieve a memory [*](((pZPxO9lYf)))
                - What really helps with learning is to connect an idea to many more contexts. And that's what we deliberately do in a slip-box
                - Memory artists also memorize unrelated pieces of information by creating associations. [*](((qpPD3-h8r)))
                - Explaining something in more detail will not be possible if you do not understand it. First step of explaining is to be able to write about it. But the second step is to explore what it means in different contexts [*](((TG5v6IOas)))
                - Elaboration i.e. explaining an idea in detail is a recommended learning technique [*](((AQEyeuXh9)))
                    - __That's why writing, explaining it to others or teaching the idea to others help you learn it better. Reason enough to start a blog to write (and other writing outlets), present for free as much as possible and create online classes is a good idea to become an expert in a subject.__
                - (Learning) comes from (Understanding) comes from (Meaningfully connecting to previous ideas) <-- You won't forget as you can retrieve with right cues. [*](((5923autG8)))
                    - __So, don't try to remember. Just try to connect to existing ideas which will eventually make you learn and recall when needed.__
                - Best scientists are also good teachers (like Richard Feynman) because they understand their subjects and also help others understand it by connecting to existing knowledge. Rather than memorize.
                - Writing in the slip-box helps us to understand by connecting. It helps us by helping us ask questions: [*](((eZN77TuFJ)))
                    - What does it mean?
                    - How does it connect to...?
                    - What is the difference between...?
                    - What is it similar to?
                - And it is more conducive to do it because content of slip-box are not sorted or grouped or classified in a structure or catalogued. Connections are easier to make amongst equally important ideas unlike how current education system approaches learning - by compartmentalizing and silo-ing disciplines. [*](((eZN77TuFJ)))
                - Trying to find similarities and differences between notes will help for better learning, instead of sorting them by topics. [*](((ljQOefd5j)))
                - Adding permanent notes to slip-box (In context of Roam)
                    - Add a note by linking it to a specific note of the topic (that makes it part of a note sequence. I think best is to add a hashtag by topic name so when I click on the tag, I see the notes as a sequence and they are linked together)
                    - If it is fresh idea, just add the note and let it be (but always give it a hashtag of a topic)
                    - And I can add a note to many different note-sequences or topics
                        - #Question Do I need to link two nodes together? If I add the same topic hashtag to both the notes, won't they be linked together in a note sequence?
            - Summary
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - A new note should always be referenced to an existing note, as far as possible. [*](((w0V5_IvQg)))
                - As more and more notes get collected in a sequence, main themes start getting formed. For digital slip-box one note, can be part of multiple main themes.
                - The note sequences are key to writing.  [*](((7hcRk98a3)))
                    - __In Roam, if I keep adding a keyword, which would be the topic, to a note, that should add it to the note sequence which becomes a topic. And it can be found under linked references__
                - Notes are only as useful as the network that they are part of. In isolation, a note is not of much use. [*](((_Ci5SS4hS)))
                - If you see a gap in a note sequence, don't bother to write a note to fill it up. Write only to further your thinking and understanding. That will show up and will be addressed when you take the note sequence out from slip-box and start writing. [*](((iXpbFQLs4)))
                - Overview of the slip-box is not possible because it is the sum total of our thinking. Not clusters are where some order is showing up within all the complexity of our ideas. [*](((wGGcv4ThN)))
                - If you add a tag to the permanent note, the list of tags will become an index. No more than 2-3 notes should get the same tag. If you add too many, then it becomes a system of storage with a structure - good only for pulling out information. Not for thinking. For thinking, interlinkage between notes is more important than linkage of index to the note. [*](((UjeoZyqmz)))
                    - __I really don't understand this. The only way in Roam I can link two notes is by making sure that a keyword (or idea or tag) shows up on both notes. So, when I look at the idea, both notes show up. And each of the notes can show up under different ideas as linked references. But, how do I do that when I am looking at one note, then the other one shows up (so looking at one note helps me discover the other note)??__
                    - __Question: How do I link two notes in Roam so that if I look at one I know other is linked to it? Without hashtags of ideas. The way I have it envisioned now, notes are linked to a topic, not to each other__
                    - __Watching the Roam Book Club video from Mike didn't take me anywhere either. It does clarify that you have to actually go and physically insert one note into another. It also added a nuance that when you are inserting another note, you should also specify the reason why you are inserting it and connecting it so that 10 years from now you can remember as to why you made that linkage.__
                        - https://www.loom.com/share/df5a997c45f041378d07eec0dbb7d273
                - Slip-box can remind us of long forgotten ideas and surfacing of these comes by keeping the notes interconnected. The index (or the list of topics) can be the entry point to start the exploration. It should be possible for us to get an overview of the topic. This overview though is temporary because the organic nature how the topic develops as notes keep getting added, will change the nature of topic itself. This is appropriate as our understanding of the topic will keep changing as we learn more and add more permanent notes. [*](((WBqF2KHKp)))
                    - __I am still not sure how to solve the problem of connecting the notes themselves. Maybe I should keep a running commentary of how different notes in a topic (showing up as linked references) are informing my understanding of the topic. But, that would likely mean that I am just continually writing articles on the topic...__
                - > The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it? The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference. [*](((37ECJavSi)))
                - What notes should a new note be linked to? It depends on what question on my mind is it contributing to. [*](((xhn6NHkAo)))
                    - __In case of backlinks or hashtags that I add for context, one way to look at it is would it make sense to ever write an article on that context.__
                - Adding keywords (or context) to note is where thinking comes in. [*](((UhUikcAob)))
                - One type of note that Luhman had was like a summary note of all other linked notes. This was needed because the body of knowledge on that topic had developed enough. [*](((UuMRDEmqT)))
                    - __To me, in Roam, this is the summary that I can write in the body of the topic note based on the information provided by the linked references showing up. As I said earlier, this is almost like continually writing an article on the topic, which is ever evolving.__
                - Note-to-Note link - this seems to be the most important kind of reference. [*](((p41nlfKWx)))
                    - __Topic based links are akin to family. Note-to-note links are akin to acquaintances. If you find an acquaintance interesting, you can take the relationship to great lengths.__
                    - __I really need to figure out how do I achieve this note to note linkage without relying on a topic. Perhaps by just putting in the block reference?__
                - It should be possible to do this note-to-note link by adding  the number of the note. [*](((ii28A6Myd)))
                    - __In Roam that number really is the block reference. Maybe that is the answer. But this is so much work. So many n to n connection__
                - Note-to-note links can give rise to surprising interconnections. And it would not be possible if notes are neatly separate in themes and topics. [*](((r5ZeouWw-)))
                    - __This makes total sense and this is the crux of idea sex. But at this time I am not sure how to implement it. There is a need to separate out the writing mind from thinking mind. I continue to think of note-taking with an eye on a written output. Not from the perspective of just understanding. And this is the Evernote and Tiago Forte kind of thinking. That is limiting. Not leaving any room for idea sex. Only idea clustering. That's a pity. I really need to solve this problem.__
                - These note-to-note connections should not be treated as a chore. It is the central reason for the utility of the slip-box. We would be doing this anyway by relying on internal memory which is an unreliable source. Slip-box gives a reliable external memory. And making these note-to-note connections gives a structured method of searching for those interconnections. [*](((yc-k4-Z2l)))
                    - __Sigh! This is almost like Sonke is reading my mind as I read the book and is touching upon the questions comin in my mind. Looks like I'll need to do this. I will need to experiment and see what kind of time vs utility relationship is showing up.__
                - Making these connections in external slip-box will also strengthen our cognition and keep our understanding honest [*](((Xs1fLmaxP)))
                - Using more and more of the slip-box makes us realize that very often the proud idea that we are about to add is already existing. Either ours or somebody else's. [*](((dVvdWUOa6)))
                - When you find older notes, and view them in current light, you realize a nuance in the idea which was missed earlier and that ends up being recorded as a new note. [*](((QjptgqZoG)))
                - Looking at existing ideas also helps formulate contrasting ideas which is helpful in clarifying our thinking further on the subject. [*](((J4BD3ktG0)))
                - As we add new notes and compare, it helps strengthen the existing notes. We update them based on current thinking and information. [*](((XoQaUBUs-)))
                - Feature-positive effect: Information that is more easily available to our brains is treated as more important. And recently acquired information is more easily available. This is almost like recency bias. Slip-box helps bring to light the information that we would have learnt in the past and helps fight the bias. [*](((UlnGDxXow)))
                - Working with the slip-box surfaces old ideas at irregular interval to us and acts as a inbuilt spaced repetition system. Like use of flash cards, just more effective, because the information is already stored in context. With connections. [*](((ZCqW4TrXP)))
                - By delegating the job of remembering to the slip-box, we can focus on understanding the basics and connecting them to existing knowledge, it frees us up to build mental models. And mental models help us be more effective in making sense of this world around us. [*](((rrSp1EqGy)))
                - Working with slip-box us pushes us into a positive feedback loop as we build the connections in our mind, the ones we are explicitly building in the slip-box. And that helps us remember better. And that in turn makes learning fun [*](((dljL9oLzm)))
                - > If we practice learning not as a pure accumulation of knowledge, but as an attempt to build up a latticework of theories and mental models to which information can stick, we enter a virtuous circle where learning facilitates learning. [*](((dljL9oLzm)))
                    - __Goal of learning new things should not be to be a store of knowledge. A computer can do a better job of storage and retrieval. The goal of learning should be to help us build mental models for ourselves which can then be applied in life__
                - __Seems like the crux of zettlekasten is this: Identify what you want to remember ➜ Translate it in your own words to make sure you understand ➜ Compare it to existing information and make connections__ [*](((jg0UUmiVw)))
                - The formula for learning is **Connect** (to existing knowledge) ➜ **Elaborate** (understand broader implications by comparing and contrasting) ➜ **Spaced Repetition** (retrieve at irregular times) ➜ **Variation** (in different contexts) [*](((3alXROjys)))
                - > Creativity is just connecting things... [*](((ePVcU_TAX)))
                    - __I guess I can be creative too, in contrast to my general belief that I am not creative. I have always felt that I am not good at coming up with original ideas, but rather good at using existing ideas to come with something new or apply it in a new and different situation. I guess, that is what creativity is... LOL. Outside of this definition, I would consider myself more innovative rather than creative. Creatives in my world are people who paint, or write poetry, or ad agency creatives - running around with long hairs or affros or other idiosyncrasies, self-pompous, wearing creativity on their sleeves. Apparently I am creative too__
                - There's no muse coming to unveil you the grand revolutionary visions [*](((tsuFTnm5G)))
                - Good ideas come to people who have spent time thinking about it, comparing and contrasting and making connections. And not to average Joe on the street. Good ideas take time to evolve due to this process of ruminating. Sudden breakthroughs are hardly sudden as they have a long history of effort put into them.
                - > It is the intuition that comes from the intimate knowledge of a practice that can lead us to new insights. [*](((efk5QQcC7)))
                - Being closely aware of the problem space and the tools needed is a required precursor to finding big possibilities. [*](((efk5QQcC7)))
                - Slip-box is your place for ideas to mix freely, so new ones can come up - Idea sex !! [*](((m6DITkv3w)))
                - Finding minor differences between ideas is important because it helps with the small steps that need to be taken towards innovation to materialize. [*](((eNe77kPqt)))
                - We need to abstract the ideas away from their context so that we can cull out the very essence of the idea at a higher more general level. At that level, you can play with multiple heterogeneous ideas and come up with new ideas. [*](((ufyJtDIzl)))
                    - __This is crucial. Beyond summarizing the idea in your own words, I also have to write out the idea in a general fashion, so that it doesn't need it's context to be understood. So, if someone else reads the idea, or if my future self, from 10 years from now, reads the idea - the meaning is still clear. The idea stands on it's own without the context. I guess that's what makes an idea evergreen. When ideas are at this level of abstraction is when you can freely mingle them, otherwise they are constrained by their contexts. Very very interesting.__
                - The whole point is to collect an idea in a context. Liberate it from it's context by abstraction. And then apply the idea in a different context . For that the idea should stand on it's own feet without support of the context. [*](((TFllyPzjk)))
                - Abstraction is necessary for ide sex across different subjects and disciplines [*](((pFJj_C203)))
                - In slip-box, abstracting an idea and re-specifying it in a different context is possible because notes are standardized in the same format [*](((0mu37NLAS)))
                - We can set our work environment in such a way that it encourages creativity [*](((D1uy190lK)))
                - Breaking old habits of thinking will be needed to come up with new ideas, of course using the slip-box. [*](((szZVctiOS)))
                - Various suggested aspects of effective thinking are already implemented in the slip-box. 1) Feedback loops to confront our mistakes by comparing and contrasting notes 2) Grasp the gist of something, beyond the details by abstracting ideas [*](((cRq2EDGw_)))
                - Restrict yourself to one idea per note and be as concise in recording the idea as possible. [*](((7p9-c0Nxy)))
                - Define a standard no-frills process for note-taking and keep it constant. [*](((CVH8smrOg)))
                - Standardization promotes less choices leading to better productivity and more enjoyment. [*](((AT3B9tugn)))
                - 
            - Summary
            - Full Text
                - ## Introduction
                    - “Every note is just an element in the network of references and back references in the system, from which it gains its quality.” (Luhmann 1992)
                        - #quote “Every note is just an element in the network of references and back references in the system, from which it gains its quality.” (Luhmann 1992)
                    - Ideally, new notes are written with explicit reference to already existing notes. Obviously, this is not always possible, especially in the beginning when the slip-box is still in its infancy, but it will very soon become the first option most of the time. Then you can put the new note “behind” an existing, related note straight away. Luhmann, working with pen and paper, would put a note behind an existing one and number it accordingly. If the existing note bore the number 21, he numbered the new note 22. If note number 22 already existed, he would still add it behind 21, but number it 21a. By alternating numbers and letters, he was able to branch out into an infinite number of sequences and sub-sequences internally with no hierarchical order.
                    - An initial subsequence that attracts more and more follow-up notes can easily become a main topic with many subtopics over time (Schmidt 2013, 172). The digital Zettelkasten makes things easier: numbers are assigned automatically, note sequences can be constructed any time later and one note can become the follow-up note to different notes at the same time.
                    - These note sequences are the backbone of text development. They combine the advantages of an abstract with a topic-related order. A pure topic-related order would have to be organised top down and requires a hierarchical order up front. A pure abstract order would not allow idea clusters and topics to be built bottom up. The individual notes would stay mostly independent and isolated with only one-dimensional references–pretty much like a one-person Wikipedia stripped of the knowledge and fact-checking abilities of the community.
                    - But a loose order of sequences allows freedom to change course when necessary and provides enough structure to build up complexity. Notes are only as valuable as the note and reference networks they are embedded in.
                    - Because the slip-box is not intended to be an encyclopedia, but a tool to think with, we don’t need to worry about completeness. We don’t need to write anything down just to bridge a gap in a note sequence. We only write if it helps us with our own thinking. The gaps we do need to concern ourselves with are the gaps in the arguments in the final manuscript–but these gaps will only become obvious in the next step, when we take the relevant notes for an argument out of the network of the slip-box and sort them into the linear order for the rough draft.
                    - As the slip-box is not a book with just one topic, we don’t need to have an overview of it. On the contrary, we are much better off accepting as early as possible that an overview of the slip-box is as impossible as having an overview of our own thinking while we are thinking. As an extension of our own memory, the slip-box is the medium we think in, not something we think about. The note sequences are the clusters where order emerges from complexity. We extract information from different linear sources and mix it all up and shake it until new patterns emerge. Then, we form these patterns into new linear texts.
                - ## 12.1 Develop Topics:
                    - After adding a note to the slip-box, we need to make sure it can be found again. This is what the index is for. Luhmann wrote an index with a typewriter on index cards. In the Zettelkasten, keywords can easily be added to a note like tags and will then show up in the index. They should be chosen carefully and sparsely. Luhmann would add the number of one or two (rarely more) notes next to a keyword in the index (Schmidt 2013, 171). The reason he was so economical with notes per keyword and why we too should be very selective lies in the way the slip-box is used. Because it should not be used as an archive, where we just take out what we put in, but as a system to think with, the references between the notes are much more important than the references from the index to a single note. Focusing exclusively on the index would basically mean that we always know upfront what we are looking for–we would have to have a fully developed plan in our heads. But liberating our brains from the task of organizing the notes is the main reason we use the slip-box in the first place.
                    - The file-box can do much more than just hand out what we request. It can surprise and remind us of long-forgotten ideas and trigger new ones. This crucial element of surprise comes into play on the level of the interconnected notes, not when we are looking for particular entries in the index. Most notes will be found through other notes. The organisation of the notes is in the network of references in the slip-box, so all we need from the index are entry points. A few wisely chosen notes are sufficient for each entry point. The quicker we get from the index to the concrete notes, the quicker we move our attention from mentally preconceived ideas towards the fact-rich level of interconnected content, where we can conduct a fact-based dialogue with the slip-box. Even though we will not get an overview of the whole slip-box (as we certainly will never get an overview of our whole internal memory), we can get an overview of a specific topic. But because the structure of topics and subtopics is not a given, but the outcome of our thinking, they too are subject to ongoing considerations and alteration. The consideration of how to structure a topic, therefore, belongs on notes as well–and not on a meta-hierarchical level. We can provide ourselves with a (temporarily valid) overview over a topic or subtopic just by making another note. If we then link from the index to such a note, we have a good entry point. If the overview on this note ceases to correctly represent the state of a cluster or topic, or we decide it should be structured differently, we can write a new note with a better structure and update the respective link from the index. This is important: Every consideration on the structure of a topic is just another consideration on a note–bound to change and dependent on the development of our understanding.
                        - The way people choose their keywords shows clearly if they think like an archivist or a writer. Do they wonder where to store a note or how to retrieve it? The archivist asks: Which keyword is the most fitting? A writer asks: In which circumstances will I want to stumble upon this note, even if I forget about it? It is a crucial difference.
                    - Let’s assume I want to add a short note that says: “Tversky/ Kahneman (1973) showed in an experiment that people are more likely to overestimate the likelihood of an event to happen if they are able to conceive it well and in detail than if it were abstract.” If you think in terms of archiving, you might feel keywords like “misjudgements,” “experimental psychology” or “experiment” would be fitting. In this case, you would think in general categories like “subject,” “discipline” or “method.” It is rather unlikely that you will ever think of writing an article based on all notes to “experimental psychology” or see the need for retrieving all notes filed under “experiment.” Maybe you will think about a book that collects “misjudgements,” but it is unlikely that you could turn any of these piles of notes into a structured argument.
                    - As writers, we approach the question of keywords differently. We look at our slip-box for already existing lines of thought and think about the questions and problems already on our minds to which a new note might contribute.
                    - If you are an economist working on decision-making, you might think of the preferences management often shows for projects with an easy-to-visualise outcome over more profitable ones. A fitting keyword would then be “capital allocation problems.” By assigning the keyword alone, the note is already put into a specific context, which gives it a particular meaning and triggers context-specific questions like: If this is a systematic effect, can it be measured? Has someone already measured it? Does the effect show up in available data, like the market value of publicly listed companies, and if so, is it that companies with products that are easy to visualise have richer valuations than those who offer services or products that are rather difficult to grasp? And if not: Is it because the experimental findings cannot be extrapolated or is it because the knowledge is already publicly available and therefore priced in? If not, is it another argument against the Efficient Market hypothesis or just a good way to stack the odds in the stock market in your favour?
                    - By assigning this keyword, you might stumble upon already existing notes on capital allocation, which either help to answer these questions or trigger new ones. But maybe you are a political scientist and read this note as an answer to the question of why certain topics are discussed during an election and others not, or why it could be politically more sensible to promote easy-to-visualise solutions over solutions that really work. Fitting keywords here might be “political strategies,” “elections” or “dysfunctionalities, political.”
                    - Keywords should always be assigned with an eye towards the topics you are working on or interested in, never by looking at the note in isolation. This is also why this process cannot be automated or delegated to a machine or program–it requires thinking. The Zettelkasten does make suggestions based on existing keywords and scans for keywords in the text you wrote. But it makes sense to see these suggestions more as a warning sign than an invitation to use them: these are the most obvious ideas and probably not the best ones. Good keywords are usually not already mentioned as words in the note. Assume I have the note “A sudden increase of ad-hoc theories is for Kuhn a sign that a normal-science phase might be in crisis (Kuhn 1967, 96).” A fitting keyword might be “paradigm change,” but that phrase is not in the note and therefore would not be suggested by the program.
                    - Assigning keywords is much more than just a bureaucratic act. It is a crucial part of the thinking process, which often leads to a deeper elaboration of the note itself and the connection to other notes.
                - ## 12.2 Make Smart Connections:
                    - Luhmann used four basic types of cross-references in his file-box (Schmidt 2013, 173f; Schmidt 2015, 165f). Only the first and last are relevant for the digital Zettelkasten, the other two are merely compensating for restrictions of the analogue pen and paper version. You don’t need to concern yourself with them if you use the digital program.
                        - 1. The first type of links are those on notes that are giving you the overview of a topic. These are notes directly referred to from the index and usually used as an entry point into a topic that has already developed to such a degree that an overview is needed or at least becomes helpful. On a note like this, you can collect links to other relevant notes to this topic or question, preferably with a short indication of what to find on these notes (one or two words or a short sentence is sufficient). This kind of note helps to structure thoughts and can be seen as an in-between step towards the development of a manuscript. Above all, they help orientate oneself within the slip-box. You will know when you need to write one. Luhmann collected up to 25 links to other notes on these kind of entry notes. They don’t have to be written in one go as links can be added over time, which again shows how topics can grow organically. What we think is relevant for a topic and what is not depends on our current understanding and should be taken quite seriously: It defines an idea as much as the facts it is based on. What we regard as being relevant for a topic and how we structure it will change over time. This change might lead to another note with a different, more adequate topic structure, which then can be seen as a comment on the previous note. Thankfully, it won’t make all the other notes redundant. As mentioned before: All we have to do is to change the entry in the index to this new note and/ or indicate on the old note that we now consider a new structure more fitting.
                        - 2. A similar though less crucial kind of link collection is on those notes that give an overview of a local, physical cluster of the slip-box. This is only necessary if you work with pen and paper like Luhmann. While the first type of note gives an overview of a topic, regardless of where the notes are located within the slip-box, this type of note is a pragmatic way of keeping track of all the different topics discussed on the notes that are physically close together. As Luhmann put notes between notes to internally branch out subtopics and sub-subtopics, original lines of thoughts were often interrupted by hundreds of different notes. This second type of note keeps track of the original lines of thought. Obviously, we don’t need to worry about this if we work with the digital version.
                        - 3. Equally less relevant for the digital version are those links that indicate the note to which the current note is a follow-up and those links that indicate the note that follows on the current note. Again, this is only relevant to see which notes follow each other, even if they don’t physically stand behind each other anymore. The digital Zettelkasten automatically adds these kinds of backlinks and presents you the relevant notes in a note sequence.
                        - 4. The most common form of reference is plain note-to-note links. They have no function other than indicating a relevant connection between two individual notes. By linking two related notes regardless of where they are within the slip-box or within different contexts, surprising new lines of thought can be established. These note-to-note links are like the “weak links” (Granovetter 1973) of social relationships we have with acquaintances: even though they are usually not the ones we turn to first, they often can offer new and different perspectives.
                    - In the digital version of the Zettelkasten, all we need to do is to click on “Links” and add the number of the note we want to refer to. It then automatically adds a backlink to the note we refer from. Even though the Zettelkasten makes suggestions here, too, for example based on joint literature references, making good cross-references is a matter of serious thinking and a crucial part of the development of thoughts.
                    - These links can help us to find surprising connections and similarities between seemingly unrelated topics. Patterns might not become visible right away, but they might emerge after multiple note-to-note links between two topics have been established. It is no coincidence that one of the main features of Luhmann’s theory of social systems is its discovery of structural patterns that could be found in very different parts of society. For example, he was able to show how vastly different things like money, power, love, truth and justice can be seen as social inventions that solve structurally similar problems (they all can be seen as media that make the acceptance of certain communication offers more likely, cf. Luhmann 1997, chapter 9–12). Observations like these could never be done nor explained by someone who is working with a system that keeps things neatly separated by preconceived themes and topics.
                    - It is important to always keep in mind that making these links is not a chore, a kind of file-box maintenance. The search for meaningful connections is a crucial part of the thinking process towards the finished manuscript. But here, it is dealt with in a very concrete way. Instead of figuratively searching our internal memory, we literally go through the file-box and look for connections. By dealing with actual notes, we are also less prone to imagine connections where there aren’t any, as we can see in black and white if something makes sense or not.
                    - As we are making these connections, we build up an internal structure of the slip-box, which is shaped by our thinking. While this structure builds up externally and independently of our limited memory, it will, in return, shape our thinking as well and help us to think in a more structured way. Our ideas will be rooted in a network of facts, thought-through ideas and verifiable references. The slip-box is like a well-informed but down-to-earth communication partner who keeps us grounded. If we try to feed it some lofty ideas, it will force us to check first: What is the reference? How does that connect to the facts and the ideas you already have?
                - ## 12.3 Compare, Correct and Differentiate:
                    - If you use the slip-box for a while, you will inevitably make a sobering discovery: The great new idea you are about to add to the slip-box turns out to be already in there. Even worse, chances are this idea wasn’t even yours, but someone else’s. Having the same thought twice or mistaking another person’s idea with our own is far from unusual. Unfortunately, most people never notice this humbling fact because they have no system that confronts them with already thought thoughts. If we forget about an idea and have it again, our brains get as excited as if we are having it the first time. Therefore, working with the slip-box is disillusioning, but at the same time it increases the chance that we actually move forward in our thinking towards uncharted territory, instead of just feeling like we are moving forward.
                    - Sometimes, the confrontation with old notes helps to detect differences we wouldn’t have noticed otherwise. What seems to be the same idea sometimes turns out to be slightly, but crucially, different. We then can explicitly discuss this difference on another note. This is especially helpful when two authors use the same concept in slightly different ways. The clarification of differences in the use of words and concepts is a major part of every serious academic work anyway–but it is so much easier if you have a nit-picking partner like the slip-box. If we had written just excerpts or notes that we had kept in separate places, these differences would only become obvious if we had all the relevant notes on our minds at the same time. It is much easier to detect these small but crucial differences when we literally have our notes in front of our eyes, comparing them during our attempts to connect them. The brain is very good at making associations and spotting patterns and similarities between seemingly different things and also very good in spotting differences between seemingly similar things, but it needs to have them presented objectively and externally. It is much easier to see differences and similarities than to detect them by mere thinking.
                    - Comparing notes also helps us to detect contradictions, paradoxes or oppositions–important facilitators for insight. When we realise that we used to accept two contradicting ideas as equally true, we know that we have a problem–and problems are good because we now have something to solve. A paradox can be a sign that we haven’t thought thoroughly enough about a problem or, conversely, that we exhausted the possibilities of a certain paradigm. Finally, oppositions help to shape ideas by providing contrast. Albert Rothenberg suggests that the construction of oppositions is the most reliable way of generating new ideas (Rothenberg 1971; 1996; 2015).
                    - The constant comparing of notes also serves as an ongoing examination of old notes in a new light. I am surprised how often the addition of one note leads to a correction, a complementation or an improvement of old ideas. Sometimes, we discover that the source given in a text is not the actual source. Sometimes, we discover that the interpretation of a study conflicts with another interpretation, making us realise that the study is so vague that it can be used as proof for two contradicting interpretations. Sometimes, we find two unrelated studies that give proof to the same point, which is not a correction, but an indication that we are on to something. Adding new notes to old notes and being forced to compare them leads not only to a constant improvement of one’s own work, but often discloses weaknesses in the texts we read. We have to compensate for that by being extra critical as readers and careful with extracting information from texts, and we always have to check the original source of a claim.[ 34]
                    - The slip-box not only confronts us with dis-confirming information, but also helps with what is known as the feature-positive effect (Allison and Messick 1988; Newman, Wolff, and Hearst 1980; Sainsbury 1971). This is the phenomenon in which we tend to overstate the importance of information that is (mentally) easily available to us and tilts our thinking towards the most recently acquired facts, not necessarily the most relevant ones. Without external help, we would not only take exclusively into account what we know, but what is on top of our heads.[ 35] The slip-box constantly reminds us of information we have long forgotten and wouldn’t remember otherwise–so much so, we wouldn’t even look for it.
                - ## 12.4 Assemble a Toolbox for Thinking:
                    - Just by working with the slip-box, we retrieve old ideas and facts on an irregular basis and connect them with other bits of information–very much how experts recommend we learn (Bjork 2011, 8; Kornell and Bjork 2008). This is also the idea behind flashcards. But even though flashcards are much more effective than cramming or reviewing information within the context of a textbook, they also have a downside: The information on flashcards is neither elaborated on nor embedded in some form of context. Each flashcard stays isolated instead of being connected with the network of theoretical frames, our experiences or our latticework of mental models. This not only makes it much more difficult to learn, but also difficult to understand the implications and the meaning of information (cf. Birnbaum et al., 2013). A scientific term or concept only becomes meaningful within the context of a theory–otherwise it would just be a word.
                    - The same is true for everyday situations. Our ability to read a situation or to interpret information depends on our broader knowledge and how we make sense of it. Science and everyday life are in this regard not so different; both are intertwined. Scientific work is much more pragmatic and less determined by theory than outsiders would expect (Latour and Woolgar 1979). At the same time, we use scientific knowledge and theories to make sense of our surroundings every day. And some theories or theoretical models are surprisingly versatile, which is why it makes sense to assemble a toolbox of useful mental models (Manktelow and Craik 2004) that could help with our daily challenges and make sense of the things we learn and encounter.
                    - Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett’s partner and vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, stresses the importance of having a broad theoretical toolbox–not to be a good academic, but to have a good, pragmatic grip on reality. He regularly explains to students which mental models have proven most useful to help him understand markets and human behaviour. He advocates looking out for the most powerful concepts in every discipline and to try to understand them so thoroughly that they become part of our thinking. The moment one starts to combine these mental models and attach one’s experiences to them, one cannot help but gain what he calls “worldly wisdom.” The importance is to have not just a few, but a broad range of mental models in your head. Otherwise, you risk becoming too attached to one or two and see only what fits them. You would become the man with a hammer who sees nails everywhere (cf. Maslow, 1966, 15).
                    - Munger writes: “Well, the first rule is that you can’t really know anything if you just remember isolated facts and try and bang ’em back. If the facts don’t hang together on a latticework of theory, you don’t have them in a usable form. You’ve got to have models in your head. And you’ve got to array your experience, both vicarious and direct, on this latticework of models. You may have noticed students who just try to remember and pound back what is remembered. Well, they fail in school and in life. You’ve got to hang experience on a latticework of models in your head.” (Munger 1994).
                    - A truly wise person is not someone who knows everything, but someone who is able to make sense of things by drawing from an extended resource of interpretation schemes. This stands in harsh contrast to the common but not-so-wise belief that we need to learn from experience. It is much better to learn from the experiences of others–especially when this experience is reflected on and turned into versatile “mental models” that can be used in different situations.
                    - When we delegate the storage of knowledge to the slip-box and at the same time focus on the principles behind an idea while we write, add and connect notes, when we look for patterns and think beyond the most obvious interpretation of a note, when we try to make sense of something, combine different ideas and develop lines of thought, we do exactly that: we build up a “latticework of mental models” instead of just “remembering isolated facts and try and bang ’em back.”
                    - The beauty of this approach is that we co-evolve with our slip-boxes: we build the same connections in our heads while we deliberately develop them in our slip-box–and make it easier to remember the facts as they now have a latticework we can attach them to. If we practice learning not as a pure accumulation of knowledge, but as an attempt to build up a latticework of theories and mental models to which information can stick, we enter a virtuous circle where learning facilitates learning.
                    - Helmut D. Sachs puts it like this: “By learning, retaining, and building on the retained basics, we are creating a rich web of associated information. The more we know, the more information (hooks) we have to connect new information to, the easier we can form long-term memories. […] Learning becomes fun. We have entered a virtuous circle of learning, and it seems as if our long-term memory capacity and speed are actually growing. On the other hand, if we fail to retain what we have learned, for example, by not using effective strategies, it becomes increasingly difficult to learn information that builds on earlier learning. More and more knowledge gaps become apparent. Since we can’t really connect new information to gaps, learning becomes an uphill battle that exhausts us and takes the fun out of learning. It seems as if we have reached the capacity limit of our brain and memory. Welcome to a vicious circle. Certainly, you would much rather be in a virtuous learning circle, so to remember what you have learned, you need to build effective long-term memory structures.” (Sachs 2013, 26)
                    - His recommendations for learning read almost like instructions for the slip-box: 1. Pay attention to what you want to remember. 2. Properly encode the information you want to keep. (This includes thinking about suitable cues.) 3. Practice recall. (Ibid., 31)
                    - We learn something not only when we connect it to prior knowledge and try to understand its broader implications (elaboration), but also when we try to retrieve it at different times (spacing) in different contexts (variation), ideally with the help of chance (contextual interference) and with a deliberate effort (retrieval). The slip-box not only provides us with the opportunity to learn in this proven way, it forces us to do exactly what is recommended just by using it. We have to elaborate on what we read just to be able to write it down and translate it into different contexts. We retrieve information from the slip-box whenever we try to connect new notes with old notes. Just by doing this, we mix up contexts, shuffle notes and retrieve the information in irregular intervals. And along the way, we further elaborate on the information, which we always retrieve deliberately.
                        - #quote We learn something not only when we connect it to prior knowledge and try to understand its broader implications (elaboration), but also when we try to retrieve it at different times (spacing) in different contexts (variation), ideally with the help of chance (contextual interference) and with a deliberate effort (retrieval). The slip-box not only provides us with the opportunity to learn in this proven way, it forces us to do exactly what is recommended just by using it. We have to elaborate on what we read just to be able to write it down and translate it into different contexts. We retrieve information from the slip-box whenever we try to connect new notes with old notes. Just by doing this, we mix up contexts, shuffle notes and retrieve the information in irregular intervals. And along the way, we further elaborate on the information, which we always retrieve deliberately.
                - ## 12.5 Use the Slip - Box as a Creativity Machine:
                    - “Creativity is just connecting things. When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty because they didn’t really do it, they just saw something.” (Steve Jobs)
                    - Many exciting stories from scientific history make us believe that great insight comes in a flash. There is the sudden insight of Watson and Crick that DNA would have to have the form of a double helix or the story of Friedrich August Kekulé, who allegedly dreamed of a snake biting its own tail and suddenly saw the structure of benzene in front of his eyes.
                    - But the reason why Watson and Crick or Kekulé had these insights and not a random person on the street is that they already had spent a very long time thinking hard about the problems, tinkered with other possible solutions and tried countless other ways of looking at the problem. Our fascination with these stories clouds the fact that all good ideas need time. Even sudden breakthroughs are usually preceded by a long, intense process of preparation.
                    - Being experienced with a problem and intimately familiar with the tools and devices we work with, ideally to the point of virtuosity, is the precondition for discovering their inherent possibilities, writes Ludwik Fleck, a historian of science (Fleck 2012, 126). This is true even for purely theoretical work. Here, too, we need experience until we can “feel our way” around the problems and questions we deal with, even if these things are words, concepts and notes in a file system. What we learn in practice is always much more thorough and complex than what we could put into words. That is why even purely theoretical work cannot be reduced to explicit knowledge, which is consciously available. This is especially true for the use of a slip-box. It is the intuition that comes from the intimate knowledge of a practice that can lead us to new insights. We might not be able to explicitly state why it is more promising to follow one idea instead of another, but being experienced, we somehow know–which is enough. Experimental scientists regularly describe their decision-making process as being based on intuition (Rheinberger 1997), and there is no reason why it should be different in the social sciences. Maybe it is just harder to accept in the social sciences as we try so hard to be more like natural scientists, who seem to do without something as vague as intuition. But intuition is not the opposition to rationality and knowledge, it is rather the incorporated, practical side of our intellectual endeavours, the sedimented experience on which we build our conscious, explicit knowledge (cf. Ahrens 2014).
                    - Steven Johnson, who wrote an insightful book about how people in science and in general come up with genuine new ideas, calls it the “slow hunch.” As a precondition to make use of this intuition, he emphasises the importance of experimental spaces where ideas can freely mingle (Johnson 2011). A laboratory with open-minded colleagues can be such a space, much as intellectuals and artists freely discussed ideas in the cafés of old Paris. I would add the slip-box as such a space in which ideas can mingle freely, so they can give birth to new ones.
                    - Most often, innovation is not the result of a sudden moment of realization, anyway, but incremental steps toward improvement. Even groundbreaking paradigm shifts are most often the consequence of many small moves in the right direction instead of one big idea. This is why the search for small differences is key. It is such an important skill to see differences between seemingly similar concepts, or connections between seemingly different ideas. This even used to be the meaning of the word “new.” “Novus,” in Latin, used to mean “different,” “unusual,” not so much “genuinely new” in the meaning of “unheard” (Luhmann, 2005, 210). To have concrete notes in front of our eyes and be able to compare them directly makes differences, even small ones, much easier to spot. (This is an advantage of the original paper slip-box, as you can spread out multiple notes on a desk instead of just seeing them on a computer screen.) The neurobiologist James Zull points out that comparing is our natural form of perception, where our cognitive interpretation is in lockstep with our actual eye movements. Therefore, comparing should be understood quite literally.
                    - We even compare when we focus on one thing: “Paying attention does not mean unrelenting attention on one focal point. Our brains evolved to notice details by shifting focus from one area to another, by repeatedly scanning the surroundings. [...] The brain is more likely to notice details when it scans than when it focuses.” (Zull 2002, 142f) This is one of the reasons why thinking works so much better when we have the very things we think about in front of our eyes. It is in our nature.
                - ## 12.6 Think Inside the Box:
                    - 
                    - 
                    - “Creative people are better at recognizing relationships, making associations and connections and seeing things in an original way—seeing things that others cannot see“ (Andreasen 2014).
                    - Comparing, differentiating and connecting notes are the basis of good academic writing, but playing and tinkering with ideas is what leads to insight and exceptional texts.
                    - To be able to play with ideas, we first have to liberate them from their original context by means of abstraction and re-specification. We did this when we took literature notes and translated them into the different contexts within the slip-box. Abstraction does not have a good reputation at the moment. It is the tangible, the concrete that is cheered for. Abstraction should indeed not be the final goal of thinking, but it is a necessary in-between step to make heterogeneous ideas compatible. If Darwin had never abstracted from his concrete observations of sparrows, he would never have found an abstract, a general principle of evolution across different species, and he would never have been able to see how evolution works in other species as well. Abstraction is also not for theoretical-academic processes of insight only. We need to abstract from concrete situations every day. Only by abstraction and re-specification can we apply ideas in the singular and always different situations in reality (Loewenstein, 2010).
                    - Even very personal, intimate experiences, like encounters with art, require abstraction. If the story of Romeo and Juliet touches us, it is certainly not because we are all members of one of two feuding families in Verona. We abstract from time and place, from the particular circumstances until we can meet the protagonists of this story on a general level where our own emotional life can resonate with what we see on stage. The tendency to juxtapose abstraction with being worldly or to associate it with intellectualism and juxtapose it with being solution-orientated is very misleading indeed.
                    - Studies on creativity with engineers show that the ability to find not only creative, but functional and working solutions for technical problems is equal to the ability to make abstractions. The better an engineer is at abstracting from a specific problem, the better and more pragmatic his solutions will be–even for the very problem he abstracted from (Gassmann and Zeschky, 2008, 103). Abstraction is also the key to analyse and compare concepts, to make analogies and to combine ideas; this is especially true when it comes to interdisciplinary work (Goldstone and Wilensky 2008).
                    - Being able to abstract and re-specify ideas is, again, only one side of the equation. It is not good for anything if we don’t have a system in place that allows us to put this into practice. Here, it is the concrete standardization of notes in just one format that enables us to literally shuffle them around, to add one idea to multiple contexts and to compare and combine them in a creative way without losing sight of what they truly contain.
                    - Creativity cannot be taught like a rule or approached like a plan. But we can make sure that our working environment allows us to be creative with ideas. It also helps to keep in mind some creativity-inducing ideas about problem-solving that might be counterintuitive. It is worth it to dwell on this subject a little bit before we move on to the next step: the preparation of the rough draft of the manuscript.
                    - The real enemy of independent thinking is not an external authority, but our own inertia. The ability to generate new ideas has more to do with breaking with old habits of thinking than with coming up with as many ideas as possible. For obvious reasons, I do not recommend “thinking outside the box”. On the contrary, we can turn the slip-box into a tool for breaking out of our own thinking habits.
                    - Our brains just love routines. Before new information prompts our brains to think differently about something, they make the new information fit into the known or let it disappear completely from our perception. Usually, we don’t even notice when our brains modify our surroundings to make it fit its expectations. We need therefore a bit of a ruse to break the power of thinking routines. In their book with the showy title “The 5 Elements of Effective Thinking”, the mathematicians Edward B. Burger and Michael Starbird collected different strategies to do that (2012). Some are already technically implemented in the slip-box, others are good to keep in mind.
                    - For example, they emphasise the importance of feedback loops and the need to find ways to confront ourselves with our errors, mistakes and misunderstandings. This is a built-in feature of the slip-box. Another habit of the effective thinkers they highlight is their ability to focus on the main ideas behind the details, to grasp the gist of something. This, too, is something the slip-box nudges us to do.
                    - Another piece of advice is not a feature of the slip-box and might sound banal, but it is crucial: Make sure that you really see what you think you see and describe it as plainly and factually as possible. Double-check if necessary. That this isn’t as obvious as it sounds will become clearer by the fact that the ability to truly see what is in front of one’s eyes is often listed as a trait of experts. And that is easily explained by the fact that our perception does not follow the order of seeing first and interpreting second. It does both at the same time: We always perceive something as something–our interpretation is instantaneous. This is why we have so much trouble not falling for an optical illusion: If we look at a three-dimensional drawing, we cannot see it just as an arrangement of lines and shapes–unless we are highly trained to do so. We don’t even notice objectively missing parts in our perception, like the blind spot in the middle of everything we see. We need a trick to see what we don’t see. As we always immediately see a whole picture of something, everything else, including the reinterpretation of it or the detection of missing bits, is a step that follows.
                    - The same is true when we read: We don’t see lines on a paper first, then realise that these are words, then use them to build sentences and finally decipher the meaning. We immediately read on the level of meaningful understanding. To really understand a text is therefore a constant revision of our first interpretation. We have to train ourselves to get used to seeing this difference and to hold back our ingrained urge to jump to conclusions. To be able to see what we see instead of what we expect to see is indeed a skill in itself, not like a character trait of being “open-minded.” Those who think of themselves as being open-minded are often even more prone to stick to their first understanding as they believe to be without natural prejudices and therefore don’t see the need to counterbalance them. If we think we can “hold back” an interpretation, we are fooling ourselves.
                    - While the constant comparison of notes can help us to detect differences, no technique can help us see what is missing. But we can make it a habit to always ask what is not in the picture, but could be relevant. This, too, does not come naturally to us.
                    - One of the most famous figures to illustrate this skill is the mathematician Abraham Wald (Mangel and Samaniego 1984). During World War II, he was asked to help the Royal Air Force find the areas on their planes that were most often hit by bullets so they could cover them with more armour. But instead of counting the bullet holes on the returned planes, he recommended armouring the spots where none of the planes had taken any hits. The RAF forgot to take into account what was not there to see: All the planes that didn’t make it back.
                    - The RAF fell for a common error in thinking called survivorship bias (Taleb 2005). The other planes didn’t make it back because they were hit where they should have had extra protection, like the fuel tank. The returning planes could only show what was less relevant.
                    - Product developers make the same mistake on such a regular basis, one has to wonder if they do it on purpose. As marketing expert Robert McMath assembled the biggest-ever collection of supermarket products, he realised midway it was becoming almost exclusively a collection of failed products because they make up the vast majority of all products ever produced. He thought a museum would be a great place for product developers to see what already proved not to work so they didn’t have to repeat the same mistake. Alas, rarely does a product developer show any interest in learning from the experience of others. Often, companies don’t even keep track of their own failed attempts, providing McMath with whole series in which one kind of mistake was made in multiple variations, sometimes from each generation of developers in the same company (McMath and Forbes 1999).
                    - In his beautifully titled book “The Antidote: Happiness for People Who Can’t Stand Positive Thinking,” Oliver Burkeman describes how much our culture is focused on success and how we neglect the important lessons from failure (Burkeman 2013). Manager biographies are a good example: Even though all of them contain some anecdotes about setbacks, these are always embedded in a bigger story about success (failed managers unfortunately rarely write biographies). If we try to extract a lesson from all these books, we might end up believing that persistence and charisma are paramount for success, even though these are exactly the same ingredients needed to screw a project up big time (Burkeman is referring to Jerker Denrell here). Obviously, the same is true in research: It is very good to know what has already proven to not work if we try to come up with new ideas that do work.
                    - One possibility to deal with this tendency is to ask counterfactual questions, like “what if?” (Markman, Lindberg, Kray and Galinsky, 2007). It is easier to learn about the function of money in a society if we wonder how strangers would exchange goods without using money than if we just focus on the obvious problems we have in a society based on money exchange. Sometimes, it is more important to rediscover the problems for which we already have a solution than to think solely about the problems that are present to us.
                    - Problems rarely get solved directly, anyway. Most often, the crucial step forward is to redefine the problem in such a way that an already existing solution can be employed. The first question should always be directed towards the question itself: What kind of answer can you expect from asking a question in this particular way? What is missing?
                    - Another seemingly banal tip relates to a distinguishing feature of extraordinary thinkers: Taking simple ideas seriously. Consider, for example, the idea of buying stocks low and selling them high. I am sure everyone can grasp that idea. But grasping an idea is not the same as understanding it. If you go and buy stocks on that “insight,” all you can do is to hope that a stock goes up after you buy it, which makes this knowledge about as useful as the tip on the next colour to choose on a roulette table.
                    - The next level of understanding is reached when you realise what you buy if you buy a stock: a part of a company. Nobody would sign a contract for a house and believe it is the contract he owns now. But many people treat a stock exactly like this. They don’t really think about what they get for the price they pay: they just assume they made a good deal when the price is lower than the day before. But the only thing Warren Buffett thinks about it is the relationship between price and value–he doesn’t even look at the price from yesterday. He understands that simple is not the same as easy, and that the worst thing you can do is to make a simple task unnecessarily complicated. A stock is a share in a company. The price is set by the market, which means by supply and demand, which touches on the rationality of market participants as well as the question of valuation, which means you have to understand something about the business you are considering investing in, including competition, competitive advantages, technological developments, etc.
                    - Making things more complicated than they are can be a way to avoid the underlying complexity of simple ideas. This is what happened during the financial crisis of 2008: Economists developed hugely complicated products, but did not take into account the simple fact that price and value are not necessarily the same. There is a reason why Buffett is not only a great investor, but also a great teacher: He not only has a vast knowledge about everything related to business, he can also explain it all in simple terms.
                    - Sometimes the breakthrough in a scientific process is the discovery of a simple principle behind a seemingly very complicated process. Burger and Starbird remind us of the long history of human attempts to fly: We tried to emulate birds by flapping wing-like apparatuses with feathers and all, but in the end, it was about not getting distracted by details and discovering that the subtle bending of the wing is the only thing that counts.
                    - Simple ideas can be tied together into consistent theories and build up enormous complexity. This just doesn’t work with complicated ideas. By using the slip-box on a daily basis, we train these important intellectual skills deliberately: We check if what we understood from a text is really in the text by having our understanding in written form in front of our eyes. We learn to focus on the gist of an idea by restricting ourselves in terms of space. We can make it a habit to always think about what is missing when we write down our own ideas. And we can practice asking good questions when we sort our notes into the slip-box and connect them with other notes.
                - ## 12.7 Facilitate Creativity through Restrictions:
                    - The slip-box imposes quite a few restrictions on its user. Instead of having the choice between all kinds of fancy notebooks, papers or writing formats, or being able to employ the whole range of productivity tools available for note-taking, learning and academic or nonfiction writing, everything is reduced to a single plain-text format and collected in a single simple slip-box system with no frills or features. Even the computer program basically just emulates a wooden box filled with plain, consecutively numbered paper. And even though the digital program lifts the physical restrictions on the length of a note, I highly recommend treating a digital note as if the space were limited. By restricting ourselves to one format, we also restrict ourselves to just one idea per note and force ourselves to be as precise and brief as possible. The restriction to one idea per note is also the precondition to recombine them freely later. Luhmann choose notes in the format A6. A good rule of thumb for working with the program is: Each note should fit onto the screen and there should be no need of scrolling.
                    - Standardised is also the way we treat literature and our own thoughts: Instead of using different kinds of notes or techniques for different kinds of texts or ideas, the approach here is always the same, simple one. Literature is condensed on a note saying, “On page x, it says y,” and later stored with the reference in one place. Ideas and thoughts are captured on the slip-box notes and connected to other notes always in the same way in the same place. These standardizations make it possible that the technical side of note-taking can become automatic. Not having to think about the organisation is really good news for brains like ours–the few mental resources we have available, we need for thinking about the actual relevant questions: those concerning the contents.
                    - This kind of self-imposed restriction is counterintuitive in a culture where more choice is usually regarded as a good thing and more tools to choose from seen as better than having less at hand. But not having to make decisions can be quite liberating. In his book “The Paradox of Choice,” Barry Schwartz used numerous examples, from shopping to career options to romance, to show that less choice can not only increase our productivity, but also our freedom and make it easier to be in the moment and enjoy it (Schwartz, 2007). Not having to make choices can unleash a lot of potential, which would otherwise be wasted on making these choices. Academic writing should definitely be added to Schwartz’ list of examples in which less choice is better.
                    - The formal standardization of the slip-box might seem to be at odds with our search for creativity. But here, too, it is more likely the opposite is true. Thinking and creativity can flourish under restricted conditions and there are plenty of studies to back that claim (cf. Stokes 2001; Rheinberger 1997). The scientific revolution started with the standardization and controlling of experiments, which made them comparable and repeatable (cf. Shapin, 1996). Or think of poetry: It imposes restrictions in terms of rhythm, syllables or rhymes. Haikus give the poet very little room for formal variations, but that doesn’t mean they are equally limited in terms of poetic expressiveness. On the contrary: It is the strict formalism that allows them to transcend time and culture.
                    - Language in itself is extremely standardised and limited in many ways. We are restricted to the use of only 26 letters, but what that enables us to do! We can write novels, theories, love letters or court orders–just by rearranging these 26 letters. This is certainly not possible despite the restriction to 26 letters, but because of it. Nobody will open a book and wish it contains more types of letters or be disappointed because it is, again, just another variation of the same alphabet.[ 36]
                    - A clear structure allows us to explore the internal possibilities of something. Even the act of breaking with convention depends on it. The limitation of the canvas does not make the artistic expressions of painters seem limited, but opens up the possibility of an artist like Lucio Fontana to cut into the canvas instead of painting on it. It is not even true that a more complex structure provides more possibilities. Quite the contrary. The binary code is radically more limited than the alphabet as it contains only two states, one or zero, but it opened up a range of creative possibilities that is unprecedented.
                    - The biggest threat to creativity and scientific progress is therefore the opposite: a lack of structure and restrictions. Without structure, we cannot differentiate, compare or experiment with ideas. Without restrictions, we would never be forced to make the decision on what is worth pursuing and what is not. Indifference is the worst environment for insight. And the slip-box is, above all, a tool for enforcing distinctions, decisions and making differences visible. One thing is for sure: the common idea that we should liberate ourselves from any restrictions and “open ourselves up” to be more creative is very misleading indeed (Dean 2013, 201).
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
                - Writing is revision of rough draft. Rough draft is ordering notes correctly. Notes are written on a daily basis and linked together. To find a topic to write, look where notes have formed clusters. That's where you find topics of your interest. [*](((IW5176D3O)))
                - With slip-box, goal of writing becomes picking up a theme and then cutting everything that is not supporting that theme to write about.
                - 
            - Summary
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
            - Highlights + Annotations
            - Summary
    - [[Afterword]]
