- ## **__NOTE: IN PROGRESS__**
- ### [[Sönke Ahrens]] **Interview**
    - ### General question about the book itself. You released it in 2017. And from there, what's happened? What's your impression of the book in regards to how it's taken course in the wider world?
        - It had a slow start and then I was pleasantly surprised how people took it, not as a step-by-step introduction, but mostly as something they turned into **a very personal thing, and they're very experimental with the system and I think that's how you should approach it. See how to make it fit your needs.**
        - It started more like a spinoff from a bigger project, I'm still working on, which is more of an academic theoretical thing; and it's also a bit of a procrastination project, because I was a bit stuck in some ways and I felt this was a good way of expressing some basic ideas about:
            - **thinking outside the brain,**
            - **breaking with the typical representational idea of the outside world and to be in a brain,**
        - At the same time, I always had the feeling: __there is no book I can really recommend my students for notetaking even though it seems to be so crucial for me__. I was always looking for a better way of doing things. I felt there was a huge disconnect between how we taught learning and how you should approach higher education with your own interest and be open-minded, and at the same time teaching techniques that were really contradicting that on a technical level. The typical start with was your thesis- start with your idea, with your goal, make a plan and then follow that plan, and I found that really frustrating. So it was really the need to have something I can give my students, which I've felt was lacking, and at the same time, I had a huge interest in [[Niklas Luhmann]]'s work (but mostly the theoretical work), but it always amazed me how it was possible to represent something so complex, and at the same time, extremely clear and full of clarity, like systems theory, and be able to connect enormously heterogeneous topics in a very systematic way that didn't feel forced.
        - Being very familiar with theories on how technology shapes our thinking, I was really curious about his way of working and he wrote a little bit about [[Zettelkasten]]. I was surprised how little attention it got in the academic community. It was mostly dismissed as if funny way of looking at this old Professor sitting with all his notes in his study, but obviously there was more to that.
        - And when you compare it to typical text, which are very linear written, they often reduce complexity in a way that is a little bit frustrating. So they take one thing, and use it as an explanation for almost everything. And you know these kinds of books that have one idea and they blow it up and try to explain almost everything with this one idea, instead of **looking for ways of making connections between very different ideas in a way that's not random.**
        - You need some kind of technology for that because the brain is not able to hold too many ideas at the same time.
        - It was a spin-off of my theoretical interest and at the same time something I was generally interested in myself; and I tried a lot of different systems:
            - I had paper in different formats,
            - I used HTML,
            - and I used other apps.
            - But I had the idea maybe if you put the idea out then someone else is better in programming and figuring out how to turn it into something usable can take some ideas of that, and can come up with a software that works, and some are more coincidentally, I think the need for that became clear in other parts of the world at the same time.
            - So, Roam, for example, is developed independently, obviously, but it immediately resonated. And I like how ideas sometimes have their time and seem to pop up in different places. 
            - I have really high hopes about this idea / the technology as being some kind of leverage for changing higher education in some degree, making it more possible to think in an interdisciplinary way and connect ideas and counteract [[confirmation bias]]. These are the high hopes.
            - The small hope is that people benefit from it while reading things, they found interesting and I think that's a lot too.
    - ### What is the benefit of reading and taking notes in this style relative to just kind of general amorphous reading and hoping it stays in your brain? What what benefit can we expect, or people should be thinking about in terms of what what it allows them to do? Going through a rigorous process of reading and note taking, what does it allow that otherwise wouldn't occur?
        - Making connections between ideas that are new and old, and some of them we might have already forgotten. And I think if we don't take notes we are kind of floating on the new ideas and new ideas are not necessarily better, and the brain is very bad at holding information correctly. So new information we usually kind of make it fit into our way of thinking. And I'm mostly interested in the moment where you have to make a decision between two notes written at different stages of your own thinking process, and you realize just by looking at them:
            - __I thought this is the same idea but it isn't... in my head, it's pretty much the same, but the moment I write it down and have to make an explicit connection, I have to write on the new note- Is it an addition? Is it contradicting? Is it just something else? I have to justify that for myself.__
        - [[Niklas Luhmann]] speaks of his [[Zettelkasten]] as a dialogue partner and I think that's a very apt metaphor- it's a dialogue partner who's not very good in thinking for itself, but **it's a dialogue partner who is so much better in holding information in the way it was written, at that time** and I think that helps with problems like [[confirmation bias]] or making things fit, and being more humble about our lack of understanding, because the moment we try to write things down we often realize, __well, it wasn't that well understood.__ Because writing it down, is a little bit like trying to explain an idea to others (it's not the same, but it's the best we have during the day).
        - There are two of the main reasons why it makes sense to take notes, which doesn't mean it makes sense to take notes on everything. It's one of the filtering processes because it obviously takes more time vs. reading more; and sometimes it's better to read more and not to take notes.
    - ### You come from the perspective of an academic community and for students. We have an eclectic group with diverse backgrounds. Do you think the advice extends to other domains? Is note-taking a good thinking style, as opposed to a good writing style, that helps?
        - Two years ago I would be very hesitant to say anything about that because it was really written for academics and nonfiction writers (people who professionally write and deal with a lot of information) but since I spoke with a lot of people from different backgrounds, I used their coaching to get a better understanding of how other people work and what their needs are and how the system might can be tweaked to different needs.
        - I'm now much more confident to say generally it works for a huge variety of professionals. I think as long as you don't take it as a step by step guide, but **think about how to make it work for yourself, it can be a good starting point to develop a system.** I'm surprised that a lot of people from business backgrounds are interested in the system. And I think people program or code have a natural connection to how to store information.
    - ### Roam is a software tool. Do you think there's anything lost or gained from using software relative to using pen and paper?
        - It's not necessarily an either-or question. I often take handwritten notes when trying to clarify something for myself before I write it down in a permanent way.
        - [[Roam]] has the huge advantage of removing friction.
        - A typical risk in your software is that you start thinking about the software more than the content you're working with, but my experience was [[Roam]] is different.
        - I am also very ignorant about new features and all the things you can do because as long as it doesn't get in the way of my writing and thinking, it has a big advantage to the sometimes laborious process of going through your paper and looking where it might fit. (It has its benefits as well. It certainly has a benefit to not have a screen on at all, because it's constantly, at least to me.)
        - For me, the net benefit is with software.
    - ### You called out the biggest misconception of [[Niklas Luhmann]] technique of over-emphasizing the note-taking and forgetting and meeting the critical aspect of setting a routine. Routines & the process of writing as opposed to the note-taking itself. **Can you speak of the routine that you use in terms of note-taking and what it looks like practically?**
        - I'm not sure I've developed a routine yet because I've only used [[Roam]] for 3 months and that's not enough time to really develop a routine.
        - My warning would be to look for a perfect system that works every day in the same way. I think that's sometimes what seems very attractive, that you have your daily routine and it becomes automatic. For me, it depends so much on where I stand with different projects.
            - A month ago, I spent 4 weeks just reading, and I took notes but I took not as many notes as you might expect, I was actually doing the in-between step which I kind of advise against within the book, and that is highlighting things I wanted to take notes on later because I felt I needed to immerse myself first completely in the books and the topic and understand what it was about and what the main themes were. (that's a luxury to spend weeks just reading and taking a few notes but not working on any manuscript, or project whatsoever.)
            - And then there are times when you have deadlines or you have projects which occupy your mind and I think it's important sometimes to focus on just that.
            - And sometimes it's one question that needs all the attention, and that means you spend the days, not in a typical routine but you spend your days, talking with people, walking, thinking and doing these things so, and I think **the routine is more something you can fall back onto, so if you feel like you're stuck, it doesn't work anymore with what you're doing at the moment, you can go back to the routine and just look for other possible entry points and being flexible is probably more important than being rigid in a certain way.**
    - ### You've been referred to as a patron saint of [[Roam]]. A big inspiration for Conor, in the early stages or in the stages of developing Rome and clearly a lot of people in the community are familiar with your book and work when we think about notetaking as support surprised you as it changes how you think about your book. Does it mean anything at all, in terms of what you work on next?
        - I got the taste of how good it feels to write something people feel they actually benefit from. So, that's for an academic writer, not something you can take for granted. And I think it does have changed a little bit. 
        - I'm still back to the bigger project, which is more developing a theory, and not really being able to talk about the content of it, but I'm pretty sure that I also want to write a version of the book that is more geared toward a broader audience. I was never really interested in the academic community itself, but **what it provides to develop ideas that can be actually beneficial.** People are so generous with their feedback and they provide very constructive critique and provide ideas, so that's enormously encouraging to think harder about how to write so it can be read by a broader audience than the typical academic community.
- ### How should we read a book, and how should we take notes on your book? is there a kind of how we anticipated it was to, you know, work through stages to have like a fleeting note stage as a kind of literature review slash zettle stage after. Any suggestions there?
    - Maybe it's good to ask yourself first, what you want to do with that.
        - Is it something you want to put into practice? Then it might not be necessary to take all the notes on the content and the references. It might not even be necessary to use your own set of customers to build up a critical mass of ideas, but it might be more important to think about how to put it into practice. So, the outcome is, in that case, not another paper, you're writing, but something you want to do. 
        - But maybe there is also the idea of you're interested in the ideas of the book, and to use it as a starting point to develop them further, and to go into details and to criticize things or to change content, and that would be more like an intellectual project in itself geared towards your own writing. In that case, I would take much more [[Zettelkasten]] notes as described, to be able to connect them with new ideas.
        - But I think the difference can be helpful, because the best way to put something into practice is not necessarily writing a lot. Sometimes it is but not necessarily.
- How do you think it changes in [[Roam]] I guess that's something we're going to try and explore and work out but trying to do it together in Rome, how do you think it changes relative to how you wrote the book. If you wrote the book. Now, it's software.
    - First of all, how to build an individual sort of cast within Rome and the second is, what happens if you do it collectively.
    - For the first question. I think there are differences, and I'm kind of glad I kept it a bit abstract, with a focus on the principles and ideas behind it, because it makes it probably easier to adjust it to [[Roam]].
    - I think the main difference is that I allow myself to write much longer notes, because you're able to have the granularity on the block level. And I mean, others pointed that out as well. So you can cross reference between that.
    - Then in the [[Zettelkasten]], one of the main features, which is also something often misunderstood in the beginning, is the note sequences. So notes which are quite densely connected, where you can actually see some kind of dialogue between the notes, where the second node might refer to the one before explicitly by starting like, but in contradiction to to that idea actually expires that shows this. So, there you have these note sequences, which I would now write within one note. And then you can branch out. But when I feel okay this is not densely connected, then I would start a new note, I would keep the granularities with one information in each block. And I would also **distinguish between different kinds of links between blocks of pages**
    - so my go to distinction is if I refer, or if I tag something was a hashtag, which is just one word. This is usually a link to a page, which is more like an index entry, where you collect stuff, so you have nodes within your network and it allows you to jump to a big node and decides where you want to go next. And these different two links to more descriptive titles, so usually containing more than just one word, and they might be just simple permanent notes as well. standalone notes, but they might become like entry points or clusters. And these clusters, I would treat differently to these index collection pages. Because I would actually describe what it is about on that page. So, these are maybe the two main differences to the paper version or to other programs, which don't have the block reference feature. Yeah,
