- Name:: [[Thomas B.]]
- Location:: [[Utrecht]], [[Netherlands]]
- [[Ideas]] before I start
    - [[Goals for Book Club]]
        - Honing my [[note taking]] skills
            - "Can we facilitate [zetteling virtuosity? ](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/Athletes_and_musicians_pursue_virtuosity_in_fundamental_skills_much_more_rigorously_than_knowledge_workers_do)"
                - I like this idea, of honing the underlying skills to knowledge work. Like practicing scales for a musician; practicing taking notes to supercharge our knowledge work!
            - By having this structure, I get motivated to read the book.
            - Wondering whether the way I'm already taking notes is similar to what the book proposes, or whether I can further refine it.  
            - I think I'm already quite good at frequently making notes in my personal graph, writing personal reflections, diary entries and notes on stuff I read. 
                - The notes for my study, I actively work on and will later summarize and synthethise into permanent notes. 
                - I have some permanent notes, most of them related to my goals and vision and projects, which I frequently check and revise.
                - However, most of the rest of my notes are scattered all over my graph, slowly accumulating in their respective tags, but never looked at again. 
                    - For a long time, there's been this nagging thought that I want to write more often. But somehow I don't really manage to do that. I'm curious whether this course will help me with that. 
        - Curious, how this [[multiplayer]] thing would work. 
            - How much interaction is there between different users?
            - Would I get inspired and learn more by sharing this graph with others?
        - "a [[zettelkasten]] becomes a dialog partner in your note taking process. "
    - Doubts
        - 'Reading' is something that I can relax in and enjoy. 
            - The process of [[note taking]] is something much more active; it takes energy, is more like 'work'. 
                - Especially if I need to be on my laptop to be able to make notes, it feels much less enjoyable than when I'm able to just read from a paper book or e-reader.
        - Is the process in the book heavily focussed on the traditional 'slip-box' or zettelkasten on paper? Will it give new insights into the digital versions like Roam?
- [[Meetup]]s
    - "[[[[Zettelkasten]] in [[Roam]] Fundamentals]] - [[Meetup]] on Wednesday, [[November 4th, 2020]] at Midnight & Noon (Los Angeles - PST)"; Midnight meeting
        - Notes
            - Is it possible for your notes and questions to be a reflection of your core?
            - [[Closure]]
                - Code = data 
                - What is this concept?
            - 'This could be Google in 1992, or Facebook in 2000'.
            - It's very powerful to see the tree of how all your earlier thoughts are interconnected. 
            - What do masters do? -> They practice the fundamentals daily.
            - Analogy of a [[Digital Garden]]: notes need a couple of steps to become fully formed. 
            - There is a tesion between being free-form and bottom-up and having structure to facilitate your thinking.
            - Use term [[Knowledge Weaving]] instead of [[Zettelkasten]], to make the concept more relatable than with a weird word. 
            - The unique concepts of Roam are the block, the tag, the Daily Notes. 
            - Why am I doing this? What's in it for me?
                - The [[Permanent Notes]] should be true to who we are, to 'reflect our core'. 
        - I found it a bit disappointing; there wasn't that much interaction going on, I felt I was getting more and more frustrated, and then just dropped out. 
- Live sessions
    - 29-11-2020
        - "Template - Apply children as text"
            - #[[Question 3]] 
                - #[[Question 2]] [Chapter 14. (Paragraph 6))](((4hIM0I_l_)))
                    - 
                - #[[Question 1]] 
                    - Instead of focussing on unhelpful habits and how to get rid of them -> focus on new habits that enrich my life. 
                    - 
- Other sources to check out
    - "#Reply [[Siva Arunagiri]] Try checking out [Andy Matushchak](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/z4SDCZQeRo4xFEQ8H4qrSqd68ucpgE6LU155C)‘ notes on how to create [[Evergreen Notes]] Good resource to check out. "
- Chat with other users
    - #Chat [[Madhav Bhatia]] "FACING THE EXACT SAME ISSUE - Notice however that Sonke actually suggests that you delet the fleeting note once you are done. The main issue is the with the literaure notes. I however, think that it is not important to figure out whether you have processed your literature notes because the same might be used in multiple contexts and once you have tagged it as processed, you will tend to filter this out. [*](((SOIkRWCj_)))"
        - #Reply-from [[Thomas B.]] In my personal graph, I've tried implementing this. 
            - I make notes in my `Daily Pages`, and often tag them with `Fleeting Notes`, and use that tag to find all of the notes I still need to process. Then, when making a `Permanent Note` out of them, I'll make a link to the original note, so it doesn't get lost completely, and then delete the tag. 
            - I ditched the `Intermediary Notes`, since I find they only add complexity and prevent the real conversation with the Zettelkasten to happen. 
            - I haven't really worked a lot with `Literature Notes` though. As I understand it, the purpose of those are also to facilitate making `Permanent Notes`. So you would need some way to keep track of which still need to be processed; I would imagine either adding a tag or removing the tag itself. 
    - 
- Fleeting Notes::
    - [[November 2nd, 2020]]
        - Started reading first two chapters. I notice I'm just liberally referencing parts of the text, whenever some thought pops into my head.  
            - Starting to get a feel for "a [[zettelkasten]] becomes a dialog partner in your note taking process. "
            - It also has a very light energy. I'm just reading and jotting down whatever thought pops into my head; I'm guessing the making sense of it and determining whether there's anything useful comes later. 
                - That's also something I'm encountering when reading other stuff: often I'm already assuming there's so much more to read than what I'm able to, that I'm expecting to definitely not have any time to also make notes __and then__ to reorganize them. So then I just don't do any of it. 
    - [[November 3rd, 2020]]
        - I realize, that for quite some time I've been feeling a bit frustrated/guilty, for not 'properly' processing my [[Fleeting Notes]]. 
            - However, when I'm thinking of doing this processing tonight, I realize I don't really know yet how I would actually start doing that. 
            - I tend to think that I should somehow come up with this one 'master document'. That I should make a synthesis of all of the references I've made and integrate those onto the main page of the #. 
            - This is actually the workflow for writing a 'paper': I would collect all of the notes I've written, order them, summarize and paraphrase them and try to come up with some kind of narrative and work out a rough draft. 
            - The first time, when the page is still empty, this might actually be feasible and even enjoyable, seeing all these old ideas and connecting them and maybe coming up with new ideas. 
            - However, the process of 'updating' this page is messy, since there can be only one 'live' or 'up-to-date' version, and the issue of 'version control' is tricky. And determining where in the existing page the new idea fits, which sections to rewrite and update, is also a complicated process.
                - Instead of the whole workflow being as effortless and enjoyable as possible, all of these things would be there, subconsciously, prohibiting me from further developing my thoughts. 
            - I like the idea of [[Permanent Notes]], where every note should be it's own independent unit. 
                - It can link to other notes for context or references, but the note should be understandable in its own right. 
                - That way, whenever I sense I have some new fleshed-out idea that's worth storing and looking up later, I can just make a new permanent note, maybe reference or copy parts of older notes, and add in the new idea. 
                - That way, i can also later track the string of references.
                    - Now, sometimes I will edit or delete existing blocks or notes, to which I've made references earlier. By doing that, those references might not be valid anymore. 
    - [[How to Take Smart Notes]]
        - [[Introduction]]
            - "Writing is not what follows research, learning or studying, it is the medium of all this work. And maybe that is the reason why we rarely think about this writing, the everyday writing, the note-taking and draft-making. Like breathing, it is vital to what we do, but because we do it constantly, it escapes our attention. But while even the best breathing technique would probably not make much of a difference to our writing, any improvement in the way we organise the everyday writing, how we take notes of what we encounter and what we do with them, will make all the difference for the moment we do face the blank page/ screen–or rather not, as those who take smart notes will never have the problem of a blank screen again."
                - I have experienced this before. When I made extensive notes on several articles, the presentation that I had to make just appeared almost automatically. 
                    - It was very joyful to have all these bits and pieces, to mix and match them and to make a new and coherent narrative out of those.
                - Also, when I'm reading for my studies now, I already make extensive notes on the books and articles I have to read. When I'm specifically studying for the Test, I can gather all these scattered notes, and just the act of making a [[synthesis]] of all of those is already a great way of getting all of the information further ingrained in my head. 
            - "There is another reason that note-taking flies mostly under the radar: We don’t experience any immediate negative feedback if we do it badly. But without an immediate experience of failure, there is also not much demand for help. And the publishing market working how it works, there is not much help in supply for this lack of demand either. It is the panic in front of the blank screen that brings students and academic writers to turn to the bookshelves full of self-help books on writing, a market publishers meet in droves by focusing on how to deal with this horse-has-already-left-the-barn situation. If we take notes unsystematically, inefficiently or simply wrong, we might not even realise it until we are in the midst of a deadline panic and wonder why there always seem to be a few who get a lot of good writing done and still have time for a coffee every time we ask them. And even then, it is more likely that some form of rationalization will cloud the view of the actual reason, which is most likely the difference between good and bad note-taking. “Some people are just like that,” “writing has to be difficult,” “the struggle is part of the deal” are just a few of the mantras that keep too many from inquiring what exactly distinguishes successful writing strategies from less successful ones. "
                - Makes me wonder: am I mediocre at [[note taking]] and just not realizing it?
            - "Luckily, this is not the whole story. We know today that self-control and self-discipline have much more to do with our environment than with ourselves (cf. Thaler, 2015, ch. 2) – and the environment can be changed. Nobody needs willpower not to eat a chocolate bar when there isn’t one around. And nobody needs willpower to do something they wanted to do anyway. Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long-and short-term interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success. This is where the organisation of writing and note-taking comes into play."
                - #Willpower; I remember reading an article sometime, that willpower can also be seen as a muscle that can be trained and get stronger. 
                    - In fact, the article suggested that whether [[Willpower]] is a finite resource that can be depleted or a muscle that can be trained depended on what the subject believed willpower to be!
                - ^^I don't remember where I've read this though.^^
            - "Luckily, this is not the whole story. We know today that self-control and self-discipline have much more to do with our environment than with ourselves (cf. Thaler, 2015, ch. 2) – and the environment can be changed. Nobody needs willpower not to eat a chocolate bar when there isn’t one around. And nobody needs willpower to do something they wanted to do anyway. Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long-and short-term interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success. This is where the organisation of writing and note-taking comes into play."
                - Agree: it's best not to have to use [[WIllpower]], and create environments that facilitate you doing whatever you need without distractions. 
                - ^^Curious, how does this relate to note taking?^^
        - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
            - "Everything You Need To Know:"
                - "Until now, writing and note-taking techniques were usually taught without much regard to the overarching workflow. This book aims to change that. It will present you with the tools of note-taking that turned the son of a brewer into one of the most productive and revered social scientists of the 20th century. But moreover, it describes how he implemented them into his workflow so he could honestly say: “I never force myself to do anything I don’t feel like. Whenever I am stuck, I do something else.” A good structure allows you to do that, to move seamlessly from one task to another–without threatening the whole arrangement or losing sight of the bigger picture."
                    - I like that. I often feel like I 'have' to do a lot, but would enjoy feelin a bit lighter and to become more flexible. 
                - "A good structure is something you can trust. It relieves you from the burden of remembering and keeping track of everything. If you can trust the system, you can let go of the attempt to hold everything together in your head and you can start focusing on what is important: The content, the argument and the ideas. By breaking down the amorphous task of “writing a paper” into small and clearly separated tasks, you can focus on one thing at a time, complete each in one go and move on to the next one (Chapter 3.1). A good structure enables flow, the state in which you get so completely immersed in your work that you lose track of time and can just keep on going as the work becomes effortless (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Something like that does not happen by chance."
                    - That seems like a nice ambition too, to facilitate the process of [[flow]] more. 
                - Having a clear structure to work in is completely different from making plans about something. If you make a plan, you impose a structure on yourself; it makes you inflexible. To keep going according to plan, you have to push yourself and employ willpower. This is not only demotivating, but also unsuitable for an open-ended process like research, thinking or studying in general, where we have to adjust our next steps with every new insight, understanding or achievement–which we ideally have on a regular basis and not just as an exception. Even though planning is often at odds with the very idea of research and learning, it is the mantra of most study guides and self-help books on academic writing. ^^How do you plan for insight, which, by definition, cannot be anticipated?^^ It is a huge misunderstanding that the only alternative to planning is aimless messing around. ^^The challenge is to structure one’s workflow in a way that insight and new ideas can become the driving forces that push us forward. We do not want to make ourselves dependent on a plan that is threatened by the unexpected, like a new idea, discovery–or insight.^^ [*](((e5t8EGtoY)))
                - "Unfortunately, even universities try to turn students into planners. Sure, planning will get you through your exams if you stick to them and push through. But it will not make you an expert in the art of learning/ writing/ note-taking (there is research on that: cf. Chapter 1.3). Planners are also unlikely to continue with their studies after they finish their examinations. They are rather glad it is over. Experts, on the other hand, would not even consider voluntarily giving up what has already proved to be rewarding and fun: learning in a way that generates real insight, is accumulative and sparks new ideas. The fact that you invested in this book tells me that you would rather be an expert than a planner."
                    - This hits home: during earlier studies, I was always in a planning mindset, feeling like I always was running behind schedule. Doing just enough preparation to attend classes and to pass the tests, and then dropping the subject and focussing on the next one. 
                    - I've always felt this yearning, to be able to study in a way 'generates real insight, is accumulative and sparks new ideas', that would give me flow and joy. 
                - "Good students, on the other hand, constantly raise the bar for themselves as they focus on what they haven’t learned and mastered yet. This is why high achievers who have had a taste of the vast amount of knowledge out there are likely to suffer from what psychologists call imposter syndrome, the feeling that you are not really up to the job, even though, of all people, they are (Clance and Imes 1978; Brems et al. 1994). This book is for you, the good students, ambitious academics and curious nonfiction writers who understand that insight doesn’t come easy and that writing is not only for proclaiming opinions, but the main tool to achieve insight worth sharing."
                    - I would like to keep this as a reminder for myself.
            - "1.1 Good Solutions are Simple – and Unexpected:"
                - "Complexity is an issue, though. Even if you don’t aim to develop a grand theory and just want to keep track of what you read, organise your notes and develop your thoughts, you will have to deal with an increasingly complex body of content, especially because it is not just about collecting thoughts, but about making connections and sparking new ideas. Most people try to reduce complexity by separating what they have into smaller stacks, piles or separate folders. They sort their notes by topics and sub-topics, which makes it look less complex, but quickly becomes very complicated. Plus, it reduces the likelihood of building and finding surprising connections between the notes themselves, which means a trade-off between its usability and usefulness."
                    - Yes, this was exactly the cycle I've been through multiple times over the years, until I came across [[Roam]]. Switching to a new system when the old one became too complicated, but it was still made up of piles and topics, so quickly it would become cluttered and complicated too, and the cycle would begin again. 
                - When it comes to writing, everything, from research to proofreading, is closely connected. All the little steps must be linked in a way that will enable you to go seamlessly from one task to another, but still be kept separate enough to enable us to flexibly do what needs to be done in any given situation. And this is the other insight of David Allen: ^^Only if you can trust your system, only if you really know that everything will be taken care of, will your brain let go and let you focus on the task at hand.^^ [*](((wAz831-X5)))
            - "1.2 The Slip-box:"
                - "While some career-oriented academics try to squeeze as many publications out of one idea as possible, Luhmann seemed to do the opposite. He constantly generated more ideas than he was able to write down. His texts read as if he is trying to squeeze as much insight and as many ideas as possible into one publication."
                    - I get excited with the prospect of this being possible: generating so many new ideas, in so many different fields!
                - "His productivity is, of course, impressive. But what is even more impressive than the sheer number of publications or the outstanding quality of his writing is the fact that he seemed to achieve all this with almost no real effort. He not only stressed that he never forced himself to do something he didn’t feel like, he even said: “I only do what is easy. I only write when I immediately know how to do it. If I falter for a moment, I put the matter aside and do something else.” (Luhmann et al., 1987, 154f.)[ 4]"
                    - This also points towards his huge [[productivity]]: Luhmann was apparently always __on__, always working and developing new ideas and theories. If he slowed down on one path, he just switched to something else and charged on. 
                    - I've always been judging myself, for starting lots of hobbies and side-projects and having many different interests; I could also start to see this as a strength!
                - "The contemporaries of Henry Ford did not understand why something as simple as the conveyor belt should be that revolutionary. What difference does it make to let the cars move from worker to worker instead of letting the workers walk from car to car? I would not be surprised if some of them even thought of Ford as a bit simpleminded and overly enthusiastic about a rather minor change in work organization. It is only in hindsight that the scale of the advantages of this small tweak became obvious to everyone. I wonder how long it will take until the advantages of Luhmann’s slip-box and work routines become equally obvious to everyone. But by then, everyone will already have known it all along the way."
                    - I'm feeling some anxiety: what if this 'secret' becomes so well-known, that everyone can become this productive? 
                        - I won't be that special then anymore.
                            - I would still have a leg up over all other people who don't know how to use this method. :)
                        - What if people use it just to get more power and more rich, instead of using it to make the world a better place? 
            - "1.3 The slip-box manual:"
                - "In a second step, shortly after, he would look at his brief notes and think about their relevance for his own thinking and writing. He then would turn to the main slip-box and write his ideas, comments and thoughts on new pieces of paper, using only one for each idea and restricting himself to one side of the paper, to make it easier to read them later without having to take them out of the box. He kept them usually brief enough to make one idea fit on a single sheet, but would sometimes add another note to extend a thought."
                    - This is different from my own workflow: I rarely review my notes after I've made them, except for when I'm studying for a test. 
                        - I feel some anxiety thinking of that: as if that would take a lot of time, to constantly also have to review all the notes I've written. 
                - "Whenever he added a note, he checked his slip-box for other relevant notes to make possible connections between them. Adding a note directly behind another note is only one way of doing this. Another way is by adding a link on this and/ or the other note, which could be anywhere in the system. This very much resembles, of course, the way we use hyperlinks on the internet. But, as I will explain later, they are quite different and it would be rather misleading to think of his slip-box as a personal Wikipedia or a database on paper. The similarities are obviously there, but the subtle differences are what makes this system unique."
                    - Luhmann would make an effort with every note, to link the idea to other ideas in his slip-box. This sounds more involved, than just jotting down a couple of tags or  putting brackets around some words, but makes the process also more valuable. 
        - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
            - "Everything You Need To Do:"
                - ""Equally manageable is the task of bringing already existing notes into order, especially if half of them already are in order." Searching through a file system with strings of discussions, plenty of material and ideas is, believe it or not, fun. It does not require the kind of focused attention you would need to formulate a sentence or to understand a difficult text. Your attention is rather at ease and it even helps to have a playful mindset. Only with a less narrow focus will you be able to see connections and patterns. You see clearly where long strings of discussions have already been built up–this is a good starting point. If you do look for specific notes, you have an index to turn to. No problem at all so far."
                    - It sounds almost playful, the way he describes this stage. 
                    - If I imagine this with my own mess of notes in my Roam and other older systems, it just feels daunting, and definitely not playful. 
                        - A difference here is, that there is already some kind of focus, or a goal to move towards; to organize a bunch of notes so that you're then able to turn those into a rough draft.
                        - In my case, I don't really have a goal; I enjoy reading and thinking about stuff, but I don't have a habit of publishing my ideas or writing articles or whatever. 
                - Granted, writing these notes is the main work. It will take enormous amounts of effort, time, patience and willpower, and you will probably break under the weight of this task. Just kidding. It is the easiest part of all. Writing these notes is also not the main work. Thinking is. Reading is. Understanding and coming up with ideas is. And this is how it is supposed to be. The notes are just the tangible outcome of it. All you have to do is to have a pen in your hand while you are doing what you are doing anyway (or a keyboard under your fingers). ^^Writing notes accompanies the main work and, done right, it helps with it. Writing is, without dispute, the best facilitator for thinking, reading, learning, understanding and generating ideas we have. Notes build up while you think, read, understand and generate ideas, because you have to have a pen in your hand if you want to think, read, understand and generate ideas properly anyway. If you want to learn something for the long run, you have to write it down. If you want to really understand something, you have to translate it into your own words. Thinking takes place as much on paper as in your own head.^^ ^^“Notes on paper, or on a computer screen [...] do not make contemporary physics or other kinds of intellectual endeavour easier, they make it possible,”^^ neuroscientist Neil Levy concludes in the introduction to the Oxford Handbook of Neuroethics, summarizing decades of research. Neuroscientists, psychologists and other experts on thinking have very different ideas about how our brains work, but, as Levy writes: “no matter how internal processes are implemented, (you) need to understand the extent to which the mind is reliant upon external scaffolding.” (2011, 270) If there is one thing the experts agree on, then it is this: You have to externalise your ideas, you have to write. Richard Feynman stresses it as much as Benjamin Franklin. If we write, it is more likely that we understand what we read, remember what we learn and that our thoughts make sense. And if we have to write anyway, why not use our writing to build up the resources for our future publications? [*](((RN5JKBqxJ)))
            - "2.1 Writing a paper step by step:"
                - 
                    - Put any thought that pops up on a note and put it in your [[inbox]] -> [[Fleeting Notes]].
                    - Ah, this is just in general, for whenever you're doing anything, are just out in the world and a thought pops up: capture it!
                        - [[Roam]] is definitely not good at doing this, since it doesn't have a mobile app and the web version takes forever to load every time I open it. 
                        - I should add this to my [[Weekly Review]], so I can trust these [[Fleeting Notes]] will be processed.
                - "2. Make literature notes. Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. Write down what you don’t want to forget or think you might use in your own thinking or writing. Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. Be extra selective with quotes–don’t copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place–your reference system."
                    - I guess I'm actually doing things right at the moment: the [[Goals for Book Club]] for [[Week 1]] were to make [[Fleeting Notes]] while reading the book. That's what I'm doing at the moment: just jotting down any thought I have into this space.
                        - I'm just referencing any passage that's in any way interesting or triggers ideas, without a filter.
                    - The focus of [[Week 2]] would be [[literature notes]]; here I would thus have to be much more focused, looking at the content, rephrasing, summarizing etc. 
                - "3. Make permanent notes. Now turn to your slip-box. Go through the notes you made in step one or two (ideally once a day and before you forget what you meant) and think about how they relate to what is relevant for your own research, thinking or interests. This can soon be done by looking into the slip-box–it only contains what interests you anyway. The idea is not to collect, but to develop ideas, arguments and discussions. Does the new information contradict, correct, support or add to what you already have (in the slip-box or on your mind)? Can you combine ideas to generate something new? What questions are triggered by them?"
                    - This is a nice idea: go through my notes daily. This might actually be a nice ritual to be able to finish my day and process whatever I've been doing during the day. 
                - "Write exactly one note for each idea and write as if you were writing for someone else: Use full sentences, disclose your sources, make references and try to be as precise, clear and brief as possible. Throw away the fleeting notes from step one and put the literature notes from step two into your reference system. You can forget about them now. All that matters is going into the slip-box."
                    - The [[Fleeting Notes]] might be the stuff I would write on my [[Daily Pages]], which would then fade into oblivion after I've reviewed my notes and the days pass on. 
                    - Anything that's relevant or interesting might have a tag added to it and thus stay connected to the rest of my graph. 
                    - Then I might also have to find a way to indicate whether a note is a [[Fleeting Notes]], a [[literature notes]] or a [[Permanent Notes]].
                - "6. After a while, you will have developed ideas far enough to decide on a topic to write about. Your topic is now based on what you have, not based on an unfounded idea about what the literature you are about to read might provide. Look through the connections and collect all the relevant notes on this topic (most of the relevant notes will already be in partial order), copy them onto your “desktop”[ 6] and bring them in order. Look for what is missing and what is redundant. Don’t wait until you have everything together. Rather, try ideas out and give yourself enough time to go back to reading and note-taking to improve your ideas, arguments and their structure. "
                    - It feels almost liberating, to see the process like this. Not having to know the whole structure and questions of a presentation before starting out, but being able to just let the material grow organically, and when I sense that I have gathered enough I can start organising and making it ready to be presented. 
        - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
            - That is why the slip-box is not introduced as another technique, but as a crucial element in an overarching workflow that is stripped of everything that could distract from what is important. ^^Good tools do not add features and more options to what we already have, but help to reduce distractions from the main work, which here is thinking. ^^The slip-box provides an external scaffold to think in and helps with those tasks our brains are not very good at, most of all objective storage of information. [*](((vbI8TekIe)))
                - I've had this tendency, to keep coming up with new tools and methods, with the result of making things more complicated instead of reducing distractions allowing me to focus on the task at hand. 
            - "That is pretty much it. To have an undistracted brain to think with and a reliable collection of notes to think in is pretty much all we need. Everything else is just clutter."
            - "3.1 The Tool Box::"
                - "1. You need something to capture ideas whenever and wherever they pop into your head. Whatever you use, it should not require any thoughts, attention or multiple steps to write it down. It can be a notebook, a napkin, an app on your phone or iPad. These notes are not meant to be stored permanently. They will be deleted or chucked soon anyway. They only function as a reminder of a thought and are not meant to capture the thought itself, which requires time to phrase proper sentences and check facts. I recommend having pen and paper with you at all times. It is really hard to beat a notebook in its simplicity. If you use other tools, make sure everything ends up in one place, a central inbox or something like that, where you can process it soon, ideally within a day."
                    - Should I start carrying a notebook with me? Maybe use the option of Evernote to record voice messages?
        - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
        - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
            - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
                - "First, the task to write is given, then there is the challenge to find a topic or a specific angle on a problem, the research to do, starting with the collection of the relevant literature, followed by reading the material, processing it and coming to a conclusion. Writing is what follows: In the beginning stands the question to be answered, followed by an overview of the literature, the discussion of it and the conclusion. This, according to this thinking, prepares you for doing independent research. Alas, it does not. If you become successful in your research, it was not because you learned to approach writing in this way, but despite it."
                    - Yes, I think I also still have this mindset. Of seeing writing as something that aims towards a goal, for instance writing an article. 
                - ^^School is different. Pupils are usually not encouraged to follow their own learning paths, question and discuss everything the teacher is teaching and move on to another topic if something does not promise to generate interesting insight. The teacher is there for the pupils to learn. [*](((U0_AKhDHt)))^^
                    - ^^ But, (...) the professor is not there for the student and the student not for the professor. Both are only there for the truth. And truth is always a public matter. Everything within the university aims at some kind of publication. A written piece does not necessarily need to be accepted in an international journal to become public. In fact, the vast majority of what is written and discussed is not published in this narrow sense. [*](((U0_AKhDHt)))^^
                        - Not sure if I agree; academia felt pretty much like school to me, where I just had to read and study what was said to me, and independent thinking wasn't that much encouraged, at least in med school. 
                    - The review process itself is a form of presenting an idea publicly to the peers and so is everything a student hands over to a professor or lecturer. Even the handout for a presentation discussed with fellow students is a written piece made public. It is public because in the discussion, it does not matter anymore what the author meant, only what is there in writing. The moment the author can be removed from the scene, the written piece is a public claim on truth. (...). If writing is the medium of research and studying nothing else than research, then there is no reason not to work as if nothing else counts than writing. [*](((U0_AKhDHt)))
                        - Maybe that's my beef with this whole chapter; I don't care that much for research! It takes as a given, that we aim at doing research. But I think my motivations are different entirely. 
                        - I'm still sensing I value writing, but this paragraph is definitely not convincing me. 
                            - I'm expecting to become more creative, to generate more ideas and insights, about myself or how the world works, by adopting a workflow like this. 
                            - I care about understanding myself more, about finding ways that work for me, about my struggles or my strengths.
                            - I also care about the world, about people suffering and understanding underlying systems and ways to change those. Understanding what's effective to change people's minds or enact change. 
                            - I don't care about 'truth' in that narrow sense; that doesn't necessarily change anyone's opinion, as we've seen over the last decades with tons of research on climate change, but hardly any significant action to remedy it. 
                        - Maybe it's also, that I enjoy the process of being creative? Of trying to understand difficult problems, coming up with new ideas, making connections, discussing those with other people etc. 
            - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
                - The slip-box is the shipping container of the academic world. Instead of having different storage for different ideas, everything goes into the same slip-box and is standardised into the same format. [*](((EVjA9eABJ)))
                - "Even though the slip-box, being organised bottom-up, does not face the trade-off problem between too many or too few topics, it too can lose its value when notes are added to it indiscriminately. It can only play out its strengths when we aim for a critical mass, which depends not only on the number of notes, but also their quality and the way they are handled."
                    - Hmm, good point. Right now I don't really have a system in my private graph to distinguish between just [[Fleeting Notes]] or more thought-out arguments. In separate pages I do synthesize and collect ideas, so there is that element to it. 
                - "To achieve a critical mass, it is crucial to distinguish clearly between three types of notes:"
                    - "1. Fleeting notes, which are only reminders of information, can be written in any kind of way and will end up in the trash within a day or two."
                        - This would be a shift of mind; how to make sure my fleeting notes don't clutter the rest of my graph?
                        - I could use tags, to indicate when I've processed my [[Fleeting Notes]]? Or add a separate tag for [[Intermediary Notes]] or [[Permanent Notes]]?
                    - "2. Permanent notes, which will never be thrown away and contain the necessary information in themselves in a permanently understandable way. They are always stored in the same way in the same place, either in the reference system or, written as if for print, in the slip-box."
                        - Would I also need some kind of top-down reference system, to keep track of what I've written? Or is the messy chaotic nature of Roam sufficient?
                        - I do have a list somewhere, with subjects and questions I'm interested in and which I would like to work on further. I guess that's plenty. 
                    - "3. Project notes, which are only relevant to one particular project. They are kept within a project-specific folder and can be discarded or archived after the project is finished."
                - "A typical mistake is made by many diligent students who are adhering to the advice to keep a scientific journal. A friend of mine does not let any idea, interesting finding or quote he stumbles upon dwindle away and writes everything down. He always carries a notebook with him and often makes a few quick notes during a conversation. The advantage is obvious: No idea ever gets lost. The disadvantages are serious, though: As he treats every note as if it belongs to the “permanent” category, the notes will never build up a critical mass. The collection of good ideas is diluted to insignificance by all the other notes, which are only relevant for a specific project or actually not that good on second sight. On top of that, the strict chronological order does not offer any help to find, combine or rearrange ideas in a productive sense. It is not surprising that my friend has a bookshelf filled with notebooks full of wonderful ideas, but not a single publication to show."
                    - I used to do this too, I still have one of those notebooks somewhere, but indeed they never really led me anywhere. The same with my diary: it's a very good way to end the day and reflect a bit, but all those insights are trapped in that silo. 
                    - I have noticed that just the act of writing, allows me to further refine ideas, and lets my subconscious then work on them. By doing this in multiple iterations, I do work out stuff and get new insights. 
                        - This is facilitated by the [[Daily Notes]] function of Roam, which makes the barrier very low for me to just start writing.
                        - Yes, this is what the concept of [[Fleeting Notes]] is about. Making sure the barrier is as low as possible for me to enter thoughts into my [[inbox]]. 
                            - So, I could just see the 'Daily Notes' in Roam as the 'Inbox' for my fleeting notes the Sönke is writing about. 
                    - However, now it's just a subconscious thing. Whenever I'm reflecting on something, I can start exploring my thoughts further by writing them down. But by explicitly connecting those thoughts to other ideas and notes, I would supercharge that process. 
                        - Now I notice, often something I encounter randomly, either an article or video or conversation, will trigger something and I'll start thinking about it and then get the urge to write it down and further refine whatever knowledge is already there. 
                        - By actually making some extra effort to connect those notes to earlier ones, I allow myself to make new connections and discoveries, further accellerating those cycles. 
                    - Also, it's a way to learn much more quickly. Our brain learns by making connections; the more connections the longer it takes to forget something. 
                - "The second typical mistake is to collect notes only related to specific projects. On first sight, it makes much more sense. You decide on what you are going to write about and then collect everything that helps you to do that. The disadvantage is that you have to start all over after each project and cut off all other promising lines of thought. That means that everything you found, thought or encountered during the time of a project will be lost. If you try to mitigate the effect by opening a new folder for every potential new project whenever you stumble upon something that might be interesting for that, you will soon end up with an overwhelming amount of unfinished projects. If that in itself does not become a drag on your motivation, the task of keeping track of them will. But most importantly, without a permanent reservoir of ideas, you will not be able to develop any major ideas over a longer period of time because you are restricting yourself either to the length of a single project or the capacity of your memory. Exceptional ideas need much more than that."
                    - Yes, I'm often worried that I'm starting too many new projects and then abandoning them shortly after. I've felt often that I then 'failed', when in fact I was just doing 'research'. 
                - "The third typical mistake is, of course, to treat all notes as fleeting ones. You can easily spot this approach by the mess that comes with it, or rather by the cycle of slowly growing piles of material followed by the impulse for major clean-ups. Just collecting unprocessed fleeting notes inevitably leads to chaos. Even small amounts of unclear and unrelated notes lingering around your desk will soon induce the wish of starting from scratch."
                    - Yep, been there. I've got this small pile of post-its lying next to my laptop, with thoughts that I thought I should process, but haven't gotten around to doing yet..
                - Fleeting notes are there for capturing ideas quickly while you are busy doing something else. (...) That might even apply to reading, if you want to focus on a text without interrupting your reading flow. Then you might want to just underline sentences or write short comments in the margins. It is important to understand, though, that underlining sentences or writing comments in the margins are also just fleeting notes and do nothing to elaborate on a text. They will very soon become completely useless–unless you do something with them. [*](((wmFEVrD5o)))
                    - Is this what I'm doing here? I am adding my own thoughts to the quotes and references. 
                    - Yes, I notice I want to start pulling in these segments, in order to start understanding what a 'fleeting note' is. But that would be more the realm of the 'literature notes' I guess. 
                - "Most ideas will not stand the test of time, while others might become the seed for a major project. Unfortunately, they are not easy to distinguish right away. That is why the threshold to write an idea down has to be as low as possible, but it is equally crucial to elaborate on them within a day or two. A good indication that a note has been left unprocessed too long is when you no longer understand what you meant or it appears banal. In the first case, you forgot what it was supposed to remind you of. In the second case, you forgot the context that gave it its meaning."
                    - Yes, this has happened often. I wrote something on a post-it or in one of my notebooks, thinking it was a great insight. But then when I finally got around to processing my notes, I could throw at least half of them out, thinking they're trivial. 
                - "The only permanently stored notes are the literature notes in the reference system and the main notes in the slip-box. The former can be very brief as the context is clearly the text they refer to. The latter need be written with more care and details as they need to be self-explanatory. Luhmann never underlined sentences in the text he read or wrote comments in the margins. All he did was take brief notes about the ideas that caught his attention in a text on a separate piece of paper: “I make a note with the bibliographic details. On the backside I would write ‘on page x is this, on page y is that,’ and then it goes into the bibliographic slip-box where I collect everything I read.” (Hagen, 1997)[ 13] But before he stored them away, he would read what he noted down during the day, think about its relevance for his own lines of thought and write about it, filling his main slip-box with permanent notes. Nothing in this box would ever get thrown away. Some notes might disappear into the background and never catch his attention again, while others might become connection points to various lines of reasoning and reappear on a regular basis in various contexts."
                    - So there's also this distinction, between the [[literature notes]] and [[Permanent Notes]]. 
                    - This is also something I mix, in my personal graph. I'll make a reference to the original text, and then just jot down my own ideas. But I'm not sure there's always a good distinction between the two. 
                - "It is the standardised format that enables the notes to build up a critical mass in one place. It is also the key to facilitating the thinking and writing process by removing all unnecessary complications or decisions that come with a variety of different formats and storage places. Only because every note is in the same format at the same place can they later be combined and assembled into something new and no thought is ever wasted on the question of where to put or label it."
                    - Ooh, I really hope this is possible!
            - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
                - It is misleading if it means that you could make a sound plan on what to write before you have immersed yourself in the topics at hand, which involves writing. It accompanies everything: We have to read with a pen in hand, develop ideas on paper and build up an ever-growing pool of externalised thoughts. We will not be guided by a blindly made-up plan picked from our unreliable brains, but by our interest, curiosity and intuition, which is formed and informed by the actual work of reading, thinking, discussing, writing and developing ideas–and is something that continuously grows and reflects our knowledge and understanding externally. [*](((kvk3dCa8w)))
                    - This is not fact; it's an assumption, a preference, to trust written notes and expand on those, rather than trusting your own brain to integrate the ideas that you've read, to integrate them and make connections, and then later come up with new ideas or decisions. 
                    - I sense that this fits well into the culture of [[Capitalism]], where everything needs to be structured and rational and quantified, instead of relying more on the chaotic and emotional and subconscious ways of intuiting.
                    - I'm wondering: I'm sensing there's different paths towards those [[Permanent Notes]].
                        - I don't agree we __have__ to write; it might be a preference or suitable for certain subjects or people, but I don't think it suits __everyone__; some people value interaction more, or thinking or feeling or oral form or some embodied practices. 
                        - I do notice, there is some truth to it, for me. Especially the 'conversation' with my system is worthwhile; I might ponder some questions for some weeks, while thinking about it, reading, trying out new stuff, discovering new information. 
                            - It helps me to write down my thoughts, discoveries, insights; it kind of allows everything to settle down and integrate, after which there's more room for my subconscious to continue working on the subject. 
                        - However, that process of my subconscious working on a subject, works only in the short-term; because I keep working on it, it stays 'fresh' and I can keep coming back to it. 
                            - However, it feels 'slippery'; when my attention moves to something, the knowledge and discoveries will start fading away. 
                            - I'm sensing that it would help me, to have this system that I can later easily retrieve those earlier thoughts when they become relevant again, and continue developing on them. 
                    - I don't want to feel like I __have__ to write about everything that I've read, and then __have__ to process those and make them into [[Intermediary Notes]] and [[Permanent Notes]].
                        - Maybe I'm starting to get the analogy with the garden: those notes need some time and attention to grow into fully fledged [[Evergreen Notes]]. 
                        - I can be very liberal with making my [[Fleeting Notes]]; they're like the seeds that I'm throwing around in my garden. 
                            - Only some of those seeds will sprout; when processing my notes, I can just ignore any ideas that are not that relevant on second thought. 
                    - It's in large part, also a resistance to the [[Processing]] stage; it feels like a lot of __work__, that's not that enjoyable.
                        - However, when I'm thinking about my own workflow, when I've made a note in Roam, often it's already kind of in the form of [[Literature Notes]] or [[Intermediary Notes]], because it contains all of the ideas that are needed to later understand what I was thinking in the moment. 
                        - While processing, those notes wouldn't necessarily take a lot of time.
                            - Sometimes, like in this section, I do go on several tangents, trying to figure out what it actually is what I'm thinking, just jotting down whatever comes to mind. Like, it's containing all of the information about the idea, but it's not necessarily very accessible for when I want to reference it later. 
                            - It would be helpful to kind of clean it up and only keep the relevant points, before labelling it with [[Intermediary Notes]].
                            - In the processing, I could link back to the original note, so the source doesn't get lost. Maybe I would like to look up some of the context or my original raw thoughts. 
                                - Maybe I could also then delete the tags and [[]] in the original note, so it doesn't show up in references of other pages. 
                    - I'm sensing also a distinction between fleeting, permanent and [[Intermediary Notes]], which would contain more my own thoughts and interpretations; and [[Literature Notes]], which just focus on the content of the source, summarized and paraphrased by myself. 
                    - "I'm sensing that it would help me, to have this system that I can later easily retrieve those earlier thoughts when they become relevant again, and continue developing on them. "
                        - It helps then too, if I had curated my notes earlier; when instead of having to work through my earlier mess of thought trains and tangents, I kept only the important bits and conclusions. And that I can see what is the 'core', the [[Permanent Notes]], and what notes are more seedlings, ready to be developed further. 
                        - Right now, my notes are more this mess, where it's hard to find what I'm looking for, because I didn't really have the tools to know how to process and curate my notes, so it's also relevant and useful for my future self. 
                            - I have felt this sense of guilt, that I wasn't 'properly' processing my notes and making these [[Permanent Notes]]. However, I'm now also seeing that I do have accumulated quite some experience with my personal system. I already have lots of ideas about what does or does not work for me; that's a fertile ground to now finally start experimenting with other methods that __do__ work and take another step.
                - "Of course, those who believe that they do start from scratch don’t really start from scratch, either, as they too can only draw on what they have learned or encountered before. But as they haven’t acted on this fact, they can’t track ideas back to their origins and have neither supporting material at hand nor their sources in order. As writing has not accompanied their previous work, they have to either start with something completely new (which is risky) or retrace their ideas (which is boring)."
                    - Yes, so that's the consequence of my advocating for a less formalised/written form of doing it and a more subconscious way of processing all information. That's fine, but the consequence is that it's hard to actually reference it where the idea came from. 
                    - This would be the result:
                        - As proper note-taking is rarely taught or discussed, it is no wonder that almost every guide on writing recommends to start with brainstorming. If you haven’t written along the way, the brain is indeed the only place to turn to. [*](((ww64gf_vE)))
                    - 
                - On its __(the brain)__ own, it is not such a great choice: it is neither objective nor reliable–two quite important aspects in academic or nonfiction writing. [*](((ww64gf_vE)))
                    - But again, this is true, but only if your goal is academic or nonfiction writing. If it's not, who cares?
            - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
                - Embracing a growth mindset means to get pleasure out of changing for the better (which is mostly inwardly rewarding) instead of getting pleasure in being praised (which is outwardly rewarding). The orientation towards the latter makes one stick to safe, proven areas. The orientation towards the first draws the attention to the areas most in need of improvement. To seek as many opportunities to learn as possible is the most reliable long-term growth strategy. . [*](((AR7OaXAvj)))
        - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
            - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
            - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
            - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
            - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
            - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
        - [[Afterword]]
- Literature Notes::
    - [[Introduction]]
    - [[Chapter 1. Everything You Need To Know]]
    - [[Chapter 2. Everything You Need to Do]]
    - [[Chapter 3. Everything You Need to Have]]
    - [[Chapter 4. A Few Things to Keep in Mind]]
    - [[The Four Underlying Principles]]
        - [[Chapter 5. Writing is the Only Thing That Matters]]
        - [[Chapter 6. Simplicity is Paramount]]
            - [[Fleeting Notes]] act as reminders for an idea, to be reviewed and processed within a couple of days and turned into [[Permanent Notes]] themselves. 
                - Don't bother with underlining in books or scribbling in the margins, if you know you won't return to them. They're just useless then. 
                - The point is to be able to record ideas, without interrupting whatever you're doing that moment. 
        - [[Chapter 7. Nobody Ever Starts From Scratch]]
        - [[Chapter 8. Let the Work Carry You Forward]]
    - [[The Six Steps to Successful Writing]]
        - [[Chapter 9. Separate the Interlocking Tasks]]
            - Different stages of the writing process, require different mindsets. [*](((AsWzUgNdr)))
                - For proofreading, you need to be like an inner critic, checking the grammar and spelling, structure, arguments.
                - For actual writing, the inner critic should be silent, and the focus is on just getting your thoughts on paper; reorganizing comes later.
                    - By constantly wanting your sentences to be perfect before writing them down, the process would become extremely slow. 
                - Outlining, developing notes and reading require different mindsets still.
            - Both in sciences and in arts, one needs to be able to flexibly switch from extremely focused to wandering, defocused minds, depending on circumstances. 
                - One needs a system that facilitates this flexibility, not makes it rigid, for example by planning before starting to write. 
            - By using the short cycles of writing notes, one can get much more feedback, learn faster and become an expert, instead of just following the rules. 
        - [[Chapter 10: Read for Understanding]]
        - [[Chapter 11. Take Smart Notes]]
        - [[Chapter 12. Develop Ideas]]  
        - [[Chapter 13. Share Your Insight]]
        - [[Chapter 14. Make it a Habit]]
    - [[Afterword]]
